Episode 18:

00:12
Welcome to LITS X.

00:13
Retail has been changing dramatically the last few years. With the growth of e-commerce, omni-channel and many new technologies, the physical stores were challenged and more so during the pandemic. To survive, companies have to change and adjust. An amazing example of this is Paderia Portuguesa, a bakery and chain restaurant in Portugal that has been growing quickly to over 1200 employees and 60 locations in Lisbon. And not only that, it's loved by its clients. In this episode, we have the pleasure of

00:43
speaking with Nuno Carvalho, the CEO and founder, to discuss the biggest challenges he has faced, how he overcame them and what's next.  Nuno has been in the food retail industry for over 20 years.  Previously, he worked as business unit director in Jerˇnimo Martins, a large international supermarket company and was part of the list Forbes leaders under 40.  I am David Bernardo Santo, and I'll be joined today by our student interviewer, Antonia Wiesenbach.  We hope you enjoy it.

01:13
Nuno, thank you so much for joining us. You know I'm a big fan of yours and we've known each other for quite some time now  and  we've been more in touch the last few years and I think what you've achieved with Paderia de Portuguesa it's very unique  not only in Portugal but worldwide and you've created something which I find fantastic which is an amazing brand.  You've been growing it; you've been facing like challenges like COVID and can you tell us a little bit to start

01:43
start the conversation. What's your vision for Paderia Portuguesa? What is Paderia Portuguesa? A little bit about its history and we go from there.

01:54
Good morning and thank you for the invitation. I'm very pleased to share our story with you guys. So, the company started 11 years ago. before part of the years, I just worked with one of the biggest retailers in Portugal. And so, I played many roles in the company from marketing to operations, and I became board member super young, 28 years old. I was that time.

02:24
in charge of the new business unit division they built up, or I built up called Meal Solutions Unit Division with the goal of developing ready-to-eat foods in the company.  And I had a very successful story personally and professionally in Geronimo Martins, but one day I decided to build my own company.  What was the driver? Well, actually, uhm.

02:50
During many years, I felt very fulfilled about that model, that corporate model of having new responsibilities, new challenges, got promoted, having a new car, traveling. That was very exciting.  I understood that it wasnĺt fulfilling myself more. From that, I started thinking what's...

03:15
can bring excitement in my professional life and career.  And so, since I was so well-treated and they gave me so many opportunities, I thought to myself, Iĺm not into moving to a different company or industry.  So, it's time because I got competences and knowledge.

03:38
let me jump into being an entrepreneur.  And in that time, what I uh identified was an opportunity in this very embraced  cultural habit in Portugal of going to pasteleria,  a snack bar  somewhere, whatever we call, so in the north they call Confeitarias, we call pastelerias in the south,  but also you have like this kind of snack bars. It's a place where people go to mingle over a coffee.

04:03
and its super embracing in our recollection habits and people from all walks of life from  old people to young people, fat people and thin people for eating or just to have a conversation with friends or having spending time with family people go to these spots  and this the offer that time was very  poor in the sense of consumer meaning  everything is owned by families meaning

04:32
mom and pop stores and they work very hard and we all know that.  They are very good professionals and we all know that.  But we also know that there wasn't professionalized vision for the business.  So of course they worked like 16, 18 years per day, 10 hours per day. So it was obviously  hard work,  but they were never able to think abroad, to see abroad.

05:02
to see in front of them. And that allowed a lot of brands to go into business. So here in Portugal, if you go to a traditional pastry store, you'll have brands like Agua das Pedras, Coca-Cola, the Delta and other coffee brands playing a role in those merchandising. And I think that this and also a retail model of the pasteleria that converted them into like

05:32
a restaurant spots and go early morning to drink a coffee and feel the fried  onion with oil  for the what we call refogado for the lunchtime it's not nice the pastry was like they  eat from baking from the scratch and they were buying most of the pastelerias from one simple pastry factory that pastry plant I'm sorry that delivered to the whole city

06:00
So, lack of differentiation in product as well. So, with that, I identify this opportunity of creating a brand with a professionalized vision and to develop a chain.  Yeah, sorry, sorry, just on that, because that's a really important thing that we speak about a lot, especially when we're talking about digital transformation. One of the things we say is like, digital transformation doesn't actually make sense.

06:27
in the sense because digital is just another enabler for changing a customer experience. So basically, you start by the customer experience.  Where did you start your process of transformation? Because I think that's really critical. So, you saw an opportunity, you saw an area and how did you start? Did you start by designing the experience or what was now in retrospect? What was like, how did you do it?  I'm trying to remember how it was.

06:55
was like almost 12 years ago. Just like most memories just make it look just make it sound nice and it was so well planned and so well thought out. No randomness at all.  I think it's taught being like to be consumer driven.  Food retail business like supermarkets give you a lot of good learnings because you can see what's happening in a store level. So, if you decide to develop this category of products

07:24
You go there and you see what happens, the reactions, the rotation of the item, and of course you have the sales data and more consumer information. But at least you have the feeling of seeing and understanding what's happening in the moment.  And that's very relevant for me as a business manager. And so, what I did was I visited, I don't know, but thousands of spots here in Portugal, in France, in Germany.

07:51
So, I was analysing the business and the consumers. What was happening at that time in the pastelerias here in Portugal?  How many staff was working there? How many items were they displaying? The food displays?  What kind of recipes?  Is it a frozen item? Is it not frozen item? Do they bake inside?  And I was asking to a lot of people that were behind the balcony, how many pastel de nata are you selling per day?  This is very good.

08:20
How many items are you selling? I remember you telling me that you have the habit, or you had the habit, I remember you telling me this a few years ago, every morning you just go and check a couple of places, right? Yes, I still do that.  So today I did three different stores. I visited three different stores because it's the way I feel more comfortable of feeling the business.  So, I see the sales data,  I analyse

08:50
A lot of information.  I have a very good team working with me.  But what I really feel is that visiting stores and talking with store managers and analysing  the consumer review, the clients' movements, and so on, what they are eating, what is left on the trays.  It's the way I feel like I'm being a good manager in a consumer perspective.

09:16
You just mentioned that in the beginning you also went to Germany, France, which are known for their bakeries. Do you have any particular change since, especially in France, you have Paul, have Pan Quotidien, there are quite a few which are very elaborate and also represented worldwide. They're huge by now.  Is there one particular chain where you say, oh, they're doing a great job, maybe somewhat of an idol that you look up to, or is it more the mixture of several brands that you want to follow? Whatĺs your take on that?

09:46
Yeah, it's a good question. of course, when I visited a lot of different brands, there were brands that were inspiring for my business and others that they weren't. And so, it was good in that sense. So, this I do not want. But I would say that I picked inspiration from many different brands. Paul is a very good example in merchandising standpoint, definitely. I learned a lot and picked a lot of ideas from the way Paul was presenting the items in the store.

10:15
 Also brands like Eric Kaiser in Paris because of the very close relationship with customers. On a store level they do CRM without knowing it.  But so, it was like a very strong approach to and proximity to customer for me.  And all over the world I travelled a lot  with my... working for Gerard Martins at that time.

10:45
I got a lot of learnings also from the US, so they are very strong in doing retail marketing.  And they have this, we call here Especialidade in Portugal, but all the pastry stores, the specialty item is Pastel Natal, so it's boring.  It's no special at all.  So, but the Americans, they do a very good program, marketing program.  They call a signature item.  And you have for many different categories. And they have a very strong narrative to the item.

11:14
So, and I also learned from that. So, what I did was like, of course I went abroad to bring perspective to the brand I wanted to build up and also to pick some ideas, but I worked strongly in the brand's personality by itself.  So, Iĺm not copying anything from anyone because what I did was like focus on Portuguese consumer in the beginning.

11:41
and bring ideas from other examples.  How was that process? How was that branding process you did? Because I think one of the things I see and I find so brilliant about Paderia is that, let's put it, it's a great brand in terms of design, it's sophisticated and everything, but it addresses its target market. So, you see a lot of brands that they are just like very cool brands.

12:08
But when you go on a mass market, they are a little bit not adjusted.  So, there's a little difference between like creativity to market fit. A lot of that is lost.  How did you manage to keep these like coolness, great taste, but also like a great market fit?

12:29
So, it's also a very good question. What I did in the beginning and itĺs super nice because even yesterday I was talking with my younger brother. He's now in love with organic wines and he wants to be a strategic and copyrighted for an advertising company. And he was like; I want to go and to open a store of organic wines in Lisbon. And he was talking and I recommended, but sit down, write down your ideas. Go and visit.

12:59
different wine bars to bring perspective, to see what you want to do and what you don't want to do.  What will be different from the others?  In differentiation, it's critical for the business. For me, it's all about differentiation.  So, what I did was like I visited a lot of spots all over the country, many different countries as well.  And I sat down to write down the vision for my company, the differentiation pillars, and the first steps to go.

13:28
And when I defined the vision was mass market. because I identified in this industry that these stores are visited for people again from all walks of life.  Everyone goes to a Pasteleria.  And again, for functional reasons to eat or just to spend time, leisure or to work nowadays. uh So it was a business for everyone.  And this means mass market. We go mass market.

13:58
We are not going to segmented business. We are not applying for niche consumers.  And this was a very relevant first statement, very relevant.  And actually, it was very good because it was, I leveraged my professional experience to build up my business. Because if I decided to go to a very niche and segmented business, I won't be bringing.

14:25
the competencies I developed 10 years in Geronimo Martins because they deal with mass market as well.  So, it was very nice because of that.  But the reason why I decided to go mass market because I felt the business fitted on mass market, not my competencies.  After that, I decided I think there is a space for a change because we are dealing with mass markets. So, if it is to everyone, it should be spread out all over the city.  And I thought in the beginning,

14:55
the city of Lisbon.  So, I did a second statement, we will become a chain.  So, the business should be developed in order to be a chain. And then I started to define differentiation pillars for the company.  And I set it down value for money.  So, we want to deliver high quality with an affordable price.  And in our business model, that's applied for us to have controlled our bakery plan. That I was being super responsible.

15:24
because I didn't know how manage an industry, neither a value chain, because I lived with supermarkets only, only the front part of the business. My intention was like to be, control of the quality of the item, know all the recipes, and to be efficient in a way that I would pass value to the consumer. So, I was irresponsible because I never tried to do that. But actually, this vision was super, it had a super relevant decision because

15:53
we forced ourselves to find a model to be replicated in a fast way to pay the fixed cost of a production structure. The second differentiation pillar was like, Iĺm sorry, Antonia, do you want to do a question? No, if you have more, keep going, I will ask the question after. The differentiation pillar was, I define, was like a very unique shopping experience and a very outstanding merchandising policy.

16:21
It was easy that time because compared to a traditional Pasteleria, it was easy to do improvements.  But it was probably one of the most relevant and strong brands moves that we did because we converted an old style and not nice places. Everything is stainless steel and ugly tiles with a lot of brands inside. So, it was easy to organize it.  We need more. So, we thought...

16:47
on the branding like a multi-sensorial approach.  So visually, of course, needed to be outstanding. That's why we have instead of displaying the pastry and breads in those classical stainless-steel trays, we are doing it in basket traditional Portuguese and handmade baskets. Also, we used amber lights instead of the white ones of the traditional pastry stores.  We have the brand...

17:16
Now the topic, I decided to go Portuguese. So here in Portugal, we have been in love with the global brands since I was young. on the 80s and 90s, we loved Gap, Calpore and all those brands. The world became global. We all have those brands all over the city. All cities we visit, we'll find those brands, Gap and so on. So that in my vision in a consumer standpoint was time to be Portuguese without...

17:46
being shy. So, we all loved that time, the sounds of the floors in Lisbon, the hills of the city, you know, the Portuguese taste that was not relevant for us because we were impressed about other countries, were becoming values in our culture. Now I would say that we are much more than this fado in Saudade culture. So, we are a country that mingles with other cultures here now in Lisbon and all over the country.

18:15
But so, the approach was like to bring to develop the Portuguese brand with an interception of traditional values and contemporary as well.  And so that's why you have this floor, which is very super Portuguese, but not only it's like the south of Europe, all Mediterranean countries use this. Mosaic the French refer to it as Capot de Simone you have the different approach, but the technique is the same.

18:45
and itĺs old style, traditional, artisanal.  And we crossed it with like black wall on the back of the display, which means modernity in one way.  So, we did this balance and we also applied to have some music in the stores, the staff well uniformed, a professional approach to the consumer.  And that was super different from what we still have in the Pastelerias in Portugal.

19:14
So, this was the second pillar of differentiation was super strong in the beginning because after seeing the back, clients got embraced with this value for money approach of the first pillar.  But it was the outside factor and also the inside, the shopping experience that convert customers into regular customers in my vision.  And then they think the products were of course high quality.

19:41
But the value for money perception was not the first pillar to be adopted by the consumers in my vision. It didn't take that long, but it was like in the first year, visitors were more interested in the novelty than in the value for money of the proposal. The third differentiation pillar, I set it up, was to develop a place relevant and super engraved in the habits of the local markets, local communities.

20:10
to be the place where a father would leave the kids. And this means trust, and it's not easy to build. And we did a lot of, and we developed a strategy to deliver it, and we did a lot of initiatives local, with a local church, with local associations, for food waste, and so on. And so, this is the way I started the company, was like to set up a vision, to define the value proposal, differentiation pillars.

20:40
This was the beginning.  And of course, this was made during my work time in Jerˇnimo Martins. I was still having those responsibilities in the company. I was a board member responsible for when I left, was marketing director, so was responsible for the marketing and commercial strategy of the company. in food retail, supermarket, sales driven marketing, sales driven communication can influence a lot.

21:08
sales and profitability but I was still visiting the country because my responsibilities at the time were national so I was visiting Pastelerias in Porto, in Coimbra, in Peixoto Parada, all over the country.  Also, I visited other countries and every time I was visiting supermarkets I entered in Pastelerias and bakery stores in other cities and I was bringing perspectives, doing benchmark and

21:36
taking decisions for my company. And one day I sat down and bought this paper.  This is what I was recommending to my brother yesterday. Coming back to the first pillar that you mentioned, the mass market that you want to target.  I think last year you opened your first store out of Lisbon, so in Setubal.  The first in Setubal.  Is that your vision for the next year? Is that you want to expand all over Portugal?

22:04
or what are your plans for the future? Yeah, so now we are talking about the future. Present slash future. So, I need to give you the backgrounds of the past and the present to discuss the future. So, what happened was, we start, we implemented these ideas and these value proposal in one store. It was super well accepted. We opened the second one and since I was pressed,

22:32
pressured because of the production side of the business, I needed to open more stores to pay and to at least generate or achieve operational breakeven.  So fastly, we opened five stores, and with five stores we were able to breathe.  And then after that we decided letĺs develop an expansion strategy.  In that point was...

22:59
critical to standardize everything, to create a process for everything. Otherwise, it would be a mess. And we did it very well. So, we pressured a lot the back office of the company. So, I was so excited with the consumer, with the acceptance that one year we jumped into open. So, we opened two stores in the first year. We opened three stores on the second year. And on the third year, we opened 10.

23:29
super pressure for the company.  I myself as a businessman, I'm always like this, it's first consumer and then we'll have to solve the problem on the back.  So, this discipline of opening stores was super relevant to create our current DNA of the company because agility is definitely with us. We are super strong implementing things.  this process. Nuno sorry to interrupt, but I think it's a really important

23:58
thing that you're saying there because a lot of companies they have their leaders focusing on the consumer and they're doing everything and it's still a small operation. And then when you scale is just collapse because like you don't have what works for you your key success factors because like something I'm always very impressed and I mentioned this to you in the past like when I saw it I was like first I was like, okay, maybe this is like very standardized.

24:27
And it's going to be a little bit like the food, the quality and everything. When you start going on chains, you don't have like  all that attention to detail.  And then one thing I kept seeing as I went to different stores and the business, I was like, well, this is actually has amazing quality, amazing service. So, it's a great example of how you scale a company.

24:50
And you look into like very famous companies like Uber, for instance, and they have massive issues of quality and even safety when they grow.  So, what you think has been like, and you went from five and then you opened five in two years and then the next year you opened double what you opened the two previous years.  What were your key success factors here that you think, okay, this is what we did right and what we did wrong?

25:15
I always say this, I'm used to saying this a lot of times, for me it's always about the consumer. If you bring a consumer culture to your company, consumer driven way of managing the company, you will always find a way to serve properly the consumer. If you focus on the process and the back office, you are no longer giving priority to the consumer.

25:43
If you really value the consumer, you need to be excellent in the deliverance.  So, it's the way I see retail businesses. It's not an exclusive way of managing the business. There is a lot of companies with a different approach.  I don't see my company a way to go different from this strategy, from this approach. How do you allow for experimentation in terms so that you don't have like a lot of mistakes that impact the consumer?

26:14
We test a lot. We do a lot of tests because we have that possibility in a very easy and cheap way.  So perhaps if you are talking about like a juice brand, let's project Compal.  Compal, if they want to develop papaya fruits or whatever, passion fruits mixed with the banana, they need to for the products.

26:42
the raw material, need to mix recipes, they need to test it, like expiring dates, they need to go and knock at the doors, they need to develop products packaging,  all the marketing communication, they need to knock at  all the supermarket stores to sell it, they need to go and send the team to sell to restaurants and Pastelerias and then you'll see that the consumer,  so they need to change the production lines for that specific product.

27:09
And we are super easy with that because we have stores working on the database and you can add a category, we can develop a new flow for the service, and you are there analysing what's happening. So, we do that a lot of time. With this new stage, and I will start talking about that soon, we did that. So, but to close, the critical success for me, it's like very strong approach to the consumer, very...

27:37
Consumers is definitely our priority and since we want to give delivery good service to him, we find a way to manage the back office.  Of course, we were kept conscious that we needed to standardize process, but we weren't that we are not definitely process-oriented company. Very interesting, especially in times nowadays where technology seems to be so crucial to everybody's business really.

28:02
Is it very represented in your company? Would you say that you rely heavily on technology or to what extent is it implemented in your supply chain, but also maybe CRMs?  I'm definitely a banker.  So, I'm very busy analysing information. I need very few numbers to manage my company.  And I've worked in a company that data was

28:32
very well managed and technology was like a huge priority for the business. But I also saw that they only used 5 % of the data that they produce and they are always in that cycle of we need more developers for the software because we need this, we need that and we will never use the developments for proper and to add value to the business. I'll say I'm a bit.

29:00
radical on this because I really know that one day I need to start bringing technology to bring efficiency but in the retail business the equation of efficiency is like sales per full-time equivalent. very interesting since you said that I think you'd like to grow more in Portugal do you think that's something that you need to start implementing technology in the next

29:27
two years or is that something for really far away? Of course, we have software but I would say that the company we manage it until the cent so it's not high numbers we sell coffees and the price we charge is 65 cents so of course we have a very deep control of the stocks and all the store managers can take like 30 percent of their like fixed income

29:56
on a variable one if they achieve profitable goals.  But the current software and the single Excel sheet are enough for us to do this. And I visit many, for instance, companies and bakery plants.  I visited in Germany and the US a lot.  And I saw, do you know, have you heard about Cheesecake Factory?  Yeah.  So

30:24
Seven years ago, six years ago, they were managing a huge, very huge, huge, bank of funds using an Excel sheet.  Of course, we did all of this.  We did it very easily. We managed our personal financials.  What I feel is like those issues bring more weight to the company and...

30:50
Again, it's bringing consumer to a lower position, and I want him to be on the top. Yeah, it's very refreshing. It's actually very refreshing to hear this because like I see often in all these companies exactly this thing. It's like, let's go for big data. And it's like, yeah, it sounds great, but you don't even use small data. And it's like, you're producing all this information that what are you going to what decision

31:19
Are you going to be able to make with this information you're taking? And of course, you can go into AI and CRM and all these things, but you have to start with the basics. And if you don't have the consumer, and I think it's true, like it ends up being not a process, but it ends being an end game in itself, technology.  Let me go again over it and again over it. And you focus so much on all these things that you forget about the client often.

31:47
And the results and the return on investment is not that high. Not taking the role of technology, which is critical, but understanding why you need all the data and technology for. We have software which is like an SAP competitor we used it, all the business units in the company. Of course, we analyse sales data.

32:14
Actually, we are reading all our financial reports because imagine, so what I'm interested in is what is the life of success comparing to 2019? When are we going to get back at the same level of 2019? And I see a daily report in my company with also the brand which is ready to be launched during the pandemic. And also, so much information.

32:44
And yesterday I realized that they were producing it with a lot of mistakes. The information was not accurate.  And no one noticed in a company that probably 100 people are opening that email. So why are we producing that information if nobody sees it? What is for our managers to observe, to take advantage of that information?

33:10
You just gave a great transition with 2019 to pre and post COVID. Maybe we want to talk a bit about that. How did it hit you? I saw that or I read that you now also sell your pastries with Uber Eats and Glovo. Was that an ad hoc decision or was it a direct direction response to COVID? What was the process there? We have currently 50 locations in the Great Lisbon area.

33:37
The city is very tiny, so it's impossible not to bump into one of our stores.  That's why we can make the convenience brands, not a destination one, because it's an easy solution, you trust, it's everything the same in all the stores, so it's trustable, it's easy to use.

33:59
Having stores spread out all over the city, pre-COVID I thought this way, we don't need an extra van. We don't need anyone to take our products to the consumer's house.  Because most of the year dealing with like, espressos, breakfasts, combos, sandwiches.  Not easy to order because it's cheap in a store level, but using through a platform, buying through a platform would be...

34:29
expensive compared to the retail prices. This was the way we thought pre-COVID. So, with the pandemic and the streets empty of people, course, we decided we needed to do it. And actually, we noticed that the delivery represented like almost 18 % of our sales. And we never closed the stores. So, it was relevant.

34:55
But again, I think that the business model of those platforms are not defined yet. They don't make money. And the players, 80 % of them don't make money as well.  What we did that time was like we convinced them to create new prices for the platform because before they didn't allow this. There was a way for us to integrate their margin in the price that we are charging to the consumer.

35:25
So, you're profitable when selling over Glovo or Uber? Yeah, profitable. Of course, currently the digital platforms weight in our sales are like seven between seven and eight percent and profitability is very tiny. But I say that it's a way, it's a tool for people to buy. Sometimes you go to the store, sometimes you order online, sometimes you use the brand's app.  So, it's a multi-channel approach and it's

35:54
It's simply stupid not to be in the... to make customers like easy in this way. we are not... like again customer centricity, what you already said.  Yeah, so it's definitely because of consumer. It's not like it's a business.  It's a business challenge for us. It's not a business challenge.  And it's... um

36:19
And in terms of the experience in your store, you make that the experience is not just about the product. It's also about like the whole environment and experience is actually pleasant.  In terms of it's like, it's very different if you do it from like when you go there. And I think it's a little bit what Starbucks has tried to do in several companies. It's like, if you're ordering an espresso and you're ordering a pastel de nata, for instance, if you're just ordering the product and delivery, it's fine.

36:48
But if you're selling also the experience, you know what? It's just like that those five minutes I have for me or the break or seeing other people and so on, youĺre creating a differentiation that that makes sense in terms in terms of experience.  Now, tell me something. Sorry, just to go back a little bit, because I think it integrates and go back to your train of thought.  You're talking about the past that you were talking about present. And I think COVID comes a lot into the present that due to the whole experience that youĺre going

37:17
through right now and then going to the future of the trends.  Do you want to get back to it about your experience?  So, COVID was of course a new gene back in the company, like all the restaurant business all over the world. It was the most unpredictable and global event probably we will ever live in our lives.  So, we survived, we changed a lot of the way we were approaching our commercial strategy. We did like...

37:45
in and out every weekend to stimulate sales. We converted in one of the lockdowns, we converted the Portuguese bakery into uh the Portuguese grocery. So, we started selling like cheese and eggs, oranges, oh and so on. So, we adjusted our business.  I spent one and a half year away from the business as the position of the CEO for personal reasons.  My goal was like to deal with

38:15
personal issues and when I started working in the company as a grant again after four months, I decided to keep the same CEO which was the former director of logistics and production. So super processes-oriented guy. My very good business partner for many years, 20 years, so we used to work together in Germany. We knew each other very well. He was working for the company the last six years I believe or seven.

38:44
I was, I trusted him. My goal was like to work on the development side of the business because the daily basis can bring you down a lot of times. Down in the sense of dealing with like very small product problems that you need to deal with it and take decisions about that. And since I was the founder, so all the issues were managed by me in the beginning, and it was like tough to release the other managers to do that. So, when I came back,

39:14
Thank God I had an outside perspective on the company, and I looked at the market, I always looked, but that's way in a different perspective, so without being blocked and pressured by the daily issues. and I thought that from 2017 we were like losing transactions. A lot of food concepts arrived in Lisbon in the last five years.

39:42
I'm not talking about bakeries or pastries or coffee shops. I'm talking about restaurants in general, food offer in general.  So, the supermarkets created new concepts, and you have Mini Presso Express, have Aldi entering the city centre. You'd like a very strong takeaway offer, ready to eat, grab and go approach.  You have brunch spots, a unique commodity breakfast. All those concepts you have.

40:10
Brands and concepts specializing in coffee.  In SŃo Bento you have Hello Christophe, The Mill, Royal Brown, all those brands.  have JosÚ Avilejo, the one-star Michelin chef, opened a chain of restaurants.  So, he democratized chefs' food to a middle class in Portugal. He opened 35 locations in the great Lisbon area among different concepts.

40:39
So, this is happening a lot since the last five years and our pockets is this size and you need to share and you need to manage it properly. And so, this month we were losing transactions because of the competitive environment and also because I think in perspective to these new players we lost like freshness. We were super fresh in the beginning compared to the traditional bakeries but the market

41:09
and it's different now. We are not competing with the old-style bakery stores.  We are competing with the whole market, and it changed a lot. So, what is now good food  is different than it was five years ago.  So, the standard is very high and different.  And they brought new references and ingredients and recipes and presentations to Portuguese middle class. Also, they are

41:39
They're well-prepared business managers that come from many different industries, design, arts, films, industry and so on.  So, they are global people with very good aesthetical skills.  So, the spaces are all super beautiful.  The architecture, the furniture.  So once again, so we were super fresh compared to the traditional pastry stores. We are no longer fresh compared to these amazing spots that are opening.

42:09
in all neighbourhoods in area. Yeah, that brings me to some trends that you can read when reading about the grocery market, which are like being sustainable, having organic products, local products. How do you integrate all those new trends, which are really relevant, especially to younger customers or just to customers nowadays, what you said compared to five years ago, how do you integrate those new trends into your own chain, into the Pasteleria? Well, that's a very good question.

42:39
What I felt and I still feel is like, took a lot of time to the mass market in Portugal, for those principles, for those way of living models, but now they adopted it very fast. We are still adopting it in a very fast way. But it was in the beginning, I imagine like four years ago, we opened our 60th store, we call it LAB.

43:07
In that store we launched a category of artisanal bread made with millerĺs flour and long fermentations. We had those recipes ready to launch since our third year of existence.  But we did some tests in stores and Portuguese consumers didn't like that bread, which was the traditional ones that our grandmothers used to eat.  But the industrial era here in Europe was very strong, like in the US.

43:37
And so only the allies that I were able to adopt these new trends. People didn't like that acid bread. People were used to eat like very soft bread that only lasted for two hours, but it was okay for them. So, it took a lot of time, but now what I feel was like it was too fast, probably with the influence of all these players, new generation. when I launched my brand, I was 32 years old.

44:05
Now I'm 43. So, my nephews were like two years old, five years old, and eight years old. One is 18, so it's a man. So, he decides whatever he wants to eat. And so, the market also grows, generations jump into different generations of decision, deciders. So, this being said, so from the market, we have declined curve from our transactions.

44:34
In my vision, it was because we lost freshness and we lost effectiveness to the market compared to these newcomers, new players that are invading the city, in the country. Just on that, how do you keep yourself from falling on the trap of your own success? You're a very successful guy, you've done an amazing brand, you have a great career.

45:03
several other aspects that you are considered a successful person by society standards. Let's just put it like that.  A lot of people would fall trap and then change happens and then they don't realize. So, you're talking about all these trends that I would love to continue for you to continue that what are the trends that you're seeing, but how don't you fall trap? It's like, I'm already like doing great and I don't need to change.

45:31
So how do you keep yourself fresh and updated? So actually, if you ask me the question like eight years ago, I think I wasn't ready to answer back to this. But now I am because I'm much more aware about myself than I was at that time. And I use like therapy tools. The therapies, we are working for the last seven years probably. And it's very relevant because you as the last

46:01
and the final decider of a company, even if you have the best team with you, you will be and feel very lonely a lot of times. Very lonely. This loneliness... It's lonely at top book Paul Claudio. Yeah, definitely. It's because you have your decision, will impact, first of all, in a lot of families, that work for your company, and also for the market, the consumer.

46:30
But what I realized about myself was like, first of all, Iĺm 80 % of myself naturally.  I'm super, super positive and I'm a dreamer.  Without doing anything, I was born like this.  The other 20 I fight for them. I want to be happy, I want to achieve good goals, personally and professionally.  I work on that. I make a lot of effort; I take a lot of risks. uh

47:00
To finalize my answer, uh Iĺm definitely a risk taker. And I think this is the difference between an entrepreneur and a very good business manager because Iĺm always ready to take risks.  I'm always ready to be out of my comfort zone. It's the opposite. Iĺm only happy when I'm not in my comfort zone.  Process is what excites me, it's what's fulfils me, and of course,

47:29
Most of my decisions, not the simple ones, but the ones that impact in the long term or medium term, I think I did good decisions.  It's an extreme sport.  It's an extreme sport being an entrepreneur. have to like the adrenaline. If not, doesn't make sense.  You've mentioned something and we'll go back to the trends. I want to be respectful of your time. Just a couple more questions.  You mentioned therapy.

47:56
Like that's something that a few years ago was very almost like it's like strong people on power. They don't need like this support system and all these things. You mentioned therapy. are talking about, about spirituality in companies. Like on the podcast, we have  an episode on the role of spirituality and self-development in companies. So, another one that is the rise of psychedelics and everything that is happening from.

48:22
silo-cyban, to mushrooms, to ayahuasca, to all these things.  What were the tools that you're comfortable about speaking that you used to find like this awareness and how did they help you?

48:38
I define myself as a fighter and it comes from my personal life. I also have problems, issues, family issues, problems, good moments and very bad moments because Iĺve recently a very sad story, a family story. Since I am 80 % of myself naturally positive, I naturally find a way to react. On the other side, the other 20, I understood that

49:08
I'm a human and having all these pressures and feeling lonely a lot of times in my professional career, in my company, my decisions. I was aware of that, and I created teams to help me to feel better with myself, to understand, to be more confident about my decisions. So, I have a team of people that support me. It's like my therapist needs to work.

49:37
that it's like a very once for a week, since a lot seven years, I think I chugged once Whatever I am, if you're Portugal or not, I stop because of that. I exercise early morning, a.m. at this Thursday, three days per week with a personal trainer. So, this is a very good thing for me, therapy and exercise with a personal trainer. Because they know me, they are.

50:05
participating in my process of growing. So, I feel very much more well prepared as a person and also as a business manager, as an entrepreneur for this team of people. This is methodology of frequency of approach for therapy and frequency of approach for exercise. We all know that exercise is very relevant for the body, for health and also to create like

50:34
routines to force you to organize your life. To what extent do you feel like you have become a better leader, maybe also for your employees and for your companies due to that process or has it reflected at all and has it had an impact on your company, on your employees? Yeah, I do believe yes. Not in a very metrical way, would say. not saying I might give it a grow.

51:02
1.0 % because of that. But I think that I can deal in a very more effective way with like different personalities, identify when one of my managers is like not comfortable, what are his or hers concerns. So, I think I have more elasticity to understand these kinds of situations.

51:30
Would you credit the corporate culture of your company to the success?  it something that you may do?  Do you credit the corporate culture of your company to its success? Do you think that the way people behave, that employees are with one another, is a reason why your company is so successful?  Nuno, We have to be respectful of your time and I know youĺre going to go into...

52:00
Just one last question. How do you see yourself in Paderia Portuguesa 5 years from now?  What's your vision?  I am the founder, I am the current CEO, and I am one of the most relevant shareholders and the shareholders structure is family.  It's family of my older brother, and cousin of mine they don't work for the company, they don't work in the industry, and they trust in the family member.

52:30
I found when I jumped into the senior position again five months ago, was like I set three main goals. First of all, to do an upgrade of the brand. So, we were not in the right position to achieve good results in my vision. Second, I want to bring the brand abroad Lisbon. That's why we did the testing in Setubal to understand how a city outside, close to Lisbon, can sit out.

52:58
like economical independence, because they have how they will accept the brand, and third to find the next CEO for the company, which is probably the hardest task of these three goals. So, after I achieve this in the next two to three years, I can decide what I will do with my life. I can stay as the president of the company and be in charge of the business development and

53:27
to ensure that the CEO and the team execute the plans. And the intent perspective is to bring the company to another level, to double turnover probably or profits. Or I can be only shareholder and to dedicate myself to different things, whatever things are.  So, I didn't decide yet. actually, currently I'm super excited about this transformation we are doing towards consumer again.

53:57
and we are in the process of start implementing the changes. So, on the coffee, we are going organic.  So, we selected the blends, developed the blends.  We did four different origins for us. It's India, Congo, Honduras, and Peru with a specific toast. And all the beverages will be using this raw material. We were already using like Millerĺs flour for our artisanal breads, which are...

54:27
which are like five varieties on a daily basis, but we decided to cut on the source of buying industrial flour. So, in our company, from the first week of November, all the stores, all the items we sell in store are made with Miller's flour from a miller called Paulino Horta, located in Alenquer.  So, we visit all the fields of agricultures that produce cereals for us. We know them by name.

54:56
I know them, I have their phone numbers in my cell phone.  And we are doing a lot of different initiatives, the three main pillars of the transformation is organic coffee, miller's flour, and seed-fuller economy. So, since the beginning we are very focused on the food waste, and we work with many different associations. Actually, we have a lot of  even legal issues, like, probably eight years ago I went to...

55:25
to parliament to present a new law  to allow restaurants to send to associations and families wasting food because at time it wasn't possible because of food safety reasons.  So, we invested a lot on that, but we are bringing the circular economy to a different level.  We will start with a very sexy story with a very interesting project. There is this guy probably you have heard about him called Nathan.

55:55
Belgium and he came to Lisbon to study in Catolica University for his master and he created a company called Mushrooms and from coffee leftovers he creates mushrooms and in the great Lisbon area we for sure are the company with more coffee leftovers and our leftovers will be from organic coffee, coffee from organic farms.

56:23
And what is interesting, it's like 90 % of the organic matter of a leftover, it's still there.  So, when you take an espresso, you only use 10 % of it. So, all the nutrients are there still. So, with the coffee leftovers, we are bringing mushrooms to our stores in integrating salads, sandwiches, and salty snacks. This is very nice because Nathan, he's a visionary, definitely.  All of us will...

56:52
getting in love with him. But what I feel like our company plays an interest role in this is like currently he's selling to these fine dining restaurants that we are not allowed to go on a daily basis and most population would never be. And us being a chain can become this relevance and can create this culture of bringing the economy to be circular.

57:22
to avoid waste of food, waste of furniture, waste of everything. So, it's like a way, new philosophy, a new approach to the market. So, we are changing cars of the supervisors to bicycles. They are not happy still, but they will be. They need to do this, and if they are not happy, they can go to different company, and we will attract people that identify themselves with our new culture that we want to create.

57:50
And this is the story, but it's much more than that. So, on dairy items, we decided to buy only local. Azores, have amazing fields, very well-treated cows.  The milk is very good. Like talking about lettuce and salad items, we are buying local from not more than one hour away from our locations, from Great Lisbon Area. We are only using Bio-X from the first week of November.  And this transformation is not...

58:20
only materialized in the assortment and in these principles. We are changing the brand image as well.  So, we are starting to enter in-stores, and we will close it every sort of three days to transform it.  We are using light-embedded architects, of course, to develop this project. We selected with them very Portuguese materials, uh like ceramics, Portuguese azuleijos.

58:48
with a lot of met reality, you can touch, can feel.  We are also defining a new communication strategy. So, the approach won't be so focused on sales, we'd be much more focused on this philosophy.  So less commercial, more principles, less price, more products. It's the way we are approaching this instance. Of course we are digital.

59:17
world in here, but as a, again, from the consumer standpoint, not as a new channel, not as a philosophy because we want to digitalize, no.  Because if consumer needs, of course we will deliver it. It's an enabler of the customer excellent experience. Sorry?  It's an enabler.

59:45
of the customers, excellent experience, not a goal.  Nunu, thank you so much. There's so much,  I always love speaking with you and seeing your vision. Thank you so much for sharing it with us. I would love to follow like on our next season with how the transformation went and how the whole process went because I think  it's so interesting to see both your personal and professional transformation.

01:00:11
and how they come and how they play into this vision and I would love to follow up this episode on the next season understanding, okay, how did all this go through? Thank you so much, it's always such a pleasure and we're on the limit of time, I hope you make it on time to your next meeting. Antonia, thank you so much as well. Goodbye. Thank you. Bye. Next week we'll be back with another episode of LITS X. This time,

01:00:41
talking of how to be a functional hyperactive person. If you enjoy the show, please subscribe to our podcast on Spotify or wherever you listen to your podcast. You may reach out to us for commenting, giving suggestions or just say hi by email  X@LITS Adventures.com, Twitter and Instagram at LITS Adventures and LinkedIn LITS Adventures.  LITS is L-I-T-S and stands for Life is Too Short.

01:01:11
LITS X Podcast is a result of the teamwork between Beatriz Chosa, Janos Schuyer, Lydine Marie Pridrich, Sigurd Kolz and David Bernardo Santo.  Please remember that more than providing answers, LITS X Podcast aims to raise awareness and questions about topics that are becoming relevant and discussed in society.  The podcast reflects the personal views of each of its participants and not any institutions.

01:01:37
It's not in any way meant to give investment, help, medical or any other type of advice.  Many of the topics addressed are still not fully tested, confirmed or approved. So please question everything you hear and exercise extreme caution.
