Episode 19:

00:06
Today at LITS X we are talking about people and more specifically hyperactive people. Everyone tells us to focus but some of us don't and thrive with it. We have today with us a very special guest, my friend Emme, an international rewarded chef and founder in Mesa Nomada and the co-founder of Taberna, one of the most important restaurants in Mexico City and Latin America. The chef's hat is just one of many he wears. He's also a DJ, photographer and recently launched a new beer brand.

00:35
From a more traditional path, changed it 180 degrees to find his passion. He overcame depression and sense of loss to find a much more fulfilling life. Let us hear from him how he went through all this and manages his hectic life on a daily basis.

00:53
Emme, welcome to LITS X. You are now among other things one of the best chefs in Mexico, have all these great projects that we'll talk about. This all looks great from the outside, but it took many years to become this overnight success. Let's go a little back in time. You were at university studying business. Your dad was an engineer, worked for 35 years in the same company. were expectations towards your career, towards everything. And then you went through all these

01:22
adventures. How did you get here?

01:25
Well, as you said, thank you for having me and just saying that I am now one of the best chefs of Mexico. It's really something that I would, I feel very honoured for you if you say it, but I still think I am always at Taverna. yes, I do agree with that. I mean, Taverna is going amazing, but yeah, still thinking about that, having that title. It's very hard, you know, it's very difficult. I don't think we are there yet, but thank you so much, man. And regarding of how,

01:55
do I get to my present? As you said, it started when I was in university, I believe so. There was a lot of pressure that I put into myself because as many other people,  thought that  having a very good income, a professional career, maybe an MBA,  it was very important and it was more than important, it was essential to be  a happy person because...

02:22
You needed this income to be secure all the time and how do you secure that income and how do you live a life that you want to without money?

02:35
You can't, no? So, the only way to actually secure that income was to have a very good professional career in a very good university and work hard. Yeah. So just like doing what most of my friends and most of the people that I was studying with were doing, just like searching for that. your opinion on money. Is money still important or? I believe that money now it's a tool and it's important. It's still very important, but it's not the key to happiness, of course not. It's more than

03:05
tool that if you use it correctly as many other people have done it you can be creative and that's actually what makes me very happy to have a space to create and have time to create and to perform in different situations. Now I believe that most of the things that I do regarding art it's cooking. In my professional career that's 90 % of my time. I cook and I run.

03:35
restaurants for most of my time and then the rest I divided into music and photography and other stuff, but what really makes me happy is that you know like being close to nature maybe doing sports and of course working a lot. So, you managed and we are going to get into how hyperactive, and we were talking before the podcast, and I really love the conversation on being a functional hyperactive that I think it's how we are going to call the podcast functional hyperactive.

04:05
But you do all these things. So, money, because I've learned from my dad one thing that I keep until today, which is the first independence you need is financial independence. Once you're financially independent, then you can follow all the other types of independences and follow other dreams. agree. What you're telling me is that you achieved this financial independence, but by following your passion and not following the traditional path. Correct. So, I would say that while.

04:35
I was in university.

04:38
Since I was not doing what I was meant to, if you want to say it like that, because my mind and my heart was not following math class or economics maybe, I was getting really bored and I was especially getting really frustrated with my grades because I was putting a lot of effort into it. But my grades were not good enough and of course my father and my mother were worried about it.

05:08
because I was not doing good at college at all. mean some classes I was but I was not. And I got really like, I felt a lot of pressure of this and that led to a depression and a lot of anxiety that was created because I wanted to make my parents happy and make me happy, but I was not doing it by...

05:34
doing what I was doing. I was not happy going to college. I was not happy doing other stuff and being with a relationship at that moment that was not making me happy. But what was making me happy, and I realized later, it was at that specific moment, it was making music and making food. So, you are at university and you were telling me you had also  an  eyesight problem? oh

06:04
You were eight months in bed, you couldn't see and then suddenly...

06:10
You changed university as well. You were studying international business. But all this was causing you lot of frustration and resulted in depression. This is a side of lot of people because like people from the outside, you're like really cool. Everyone is always like you're always laughing. Everyone talks about you and everything. But and people are like, oh, it must be just like these joyful people or happy all the time. But you actually fought for a long time.

06:40
with depression and you were telling me that sometimes you still do and it's their present. So how did you overcome it? You are at university, you have all this pressure like a lot of us have had. Burning this podcast for Nova University, a lot of the students, our business students as well, and they are like struggling to fight their vocation, their passion, how can they make everyone happy including themselves? So, what happens then? So, what happened is that I was...

07:08
Well, first of all, the eye problem was because I was born with a sort of condition that doesn't allow your eye to grow properly. And long story short, I had to wait until I was 21 to get my eye surgery and they did a transplant of my uh cristalino, which is like a lens, natural lens of the eye. Since it's a very difficult operation, you have to do one eye and if you don't go blind,

07:38
than due to the other ones. So that's why you have to wait in bed for so much time. And it's very difficult, but yeah, after that time, I went back to college. I decided to do all my effort, and I thought that was the problem, not that I couldn't see properly. that was the problem that my grades were not good and that my performance was not good. And it was not. So, when I went back into college and I tried to do my best, the depression came.

08:15
What of help did you? Were you on medication as well?

08:38
So, when I went into the psychiatrist for the first time, he gave me some pills. It was not antidepressant, but it was anxiolyticos. I asked him not to, and he was laughing at my face because he was like, dude, this is what I do. This is my job. I give pills to people. But he said something very special. He said, OK, let's do something. Letĺs try to work with these pills. Let's see how we...

09:05
for you, let's see how you feel and let's work with these pills for two months. We'll keep talking, we'll keep going through therapy and weĺll talk about it in two months. And I was, okay, let's give it a try. Nothing to lose right now, honestly. I start feeling better and then he told me like, okay, like honestly, you do not have any problems, really. Like I would say that you are pretty much okay, but.

09:35
If you want to get rid of the pills forever, you do not want to take them anymore. This is the thing that you have to do. You have to go to some place away from Mexico. It must be a place that they do not speak Spanish. It should be another language that you do not speak. And go there for six months and work there. Whatever you want. Next session, you have to tell me three different countries that you would like to be there. So, I did.

10:05
Next session the only  country that I thought it was Brazil  and long story short  one month I was in Brazil working cooking  and Tell me how to get there because so you're studying you're at university or depressed  and then  a Month later you're in Brazil cooking what happened here.  So, as we were talking before you create your own story and also you have to

10:35
go and flow with nature and what the universe is giving you the opportunities now. And at that moment I had some friends and I was very close to them, and they knew some people in Brazil. They were helping me with my condition at that moment. One of them said like, hey, you know, like I know this person who needs a chef, a Mexican chef in Brazil. And you had...

11:01
No education. Zero experience. You cooked for your friends. You were telling me that you cooked for your friends since you remember but that is it. You liked to cook and you were Mexican therefore you could go and open a Mexican restaurant in Brazil. Something that happened that I think it's important to say is that while I was depressed, I couldn't sleep at night, but I was basically sleeping all day but at night I was awake like an owl and the only thing that I would watch on TV was.

11:31
province. So, you could say that for seven months of total depression before I got treated because this is something that happened before I started taking the pills. I was doing my own degree on cooking in television without YouTube at night because that was the only moment that I had energy to actually really motivate him.

12:01
me you know like  I was very looking forward to  watch these programs and learned  from these amazing chefs from tv and  I was taking notes man like I was not doing that in college  you know  but I was very motivated on  this subject so at the same time I was  doing college

12:23
There were some subjects that I was really good at because I was very motivated. But on the other hand, there were other subjects in college that I was not doing very good because I was not motivated and maybe the system was not for me, you know? So in between, this is what happened.

12:39
cooking became sort of like an escape route into my depression and music also. So that was the main things that I was doing. That was the things that kept me motivated into literally keep on going with my life and do something that I really wanted to do. And thanks to my business degree, now I can organize myself into be a successful restaurateur.

13:08
or chef or photographer if you want to say it like that. It is funny because um I went through the same as I studied business and then I did my MBA and often I questioned if it was like the right approach for me if it was what I wanted to do in

13:28
in life and it's like is this business but what it gave me because at the same time was a tv show host as well and I was like maybe I should be a journalist and  I was traveling around the world and everything and I remember actually my  parents telling me you graduate here and then you do whatever and one thing I think business gives you is a sense of like  doing money and actually organizing things so then you can do a lot of different things that  but you have a more organized than business driven mind so I think it's

13:58
funny because yeah today I'm thankful I did  not always I enjoyed  studying it  yeah I mean I think that  for me specifically it's the way I study  because I study alone  up to these days  you know I put a lot  of time into  keep learning in  a lot of subjects such as cooking,  numbers in a restaurant

14:27
how to use camera properly, how to use DJ set properly, how to record it.

14:36
how to, you know, like there is so many things to learn in these matters. And I have always been super curious, always. And just like you said, while I was doing business, I pictured myself doing so many other stuff in my mind, and I could see myself doing it. And then for some reason, there's conditions and people to tell you that that is not the way to do it. And I would tell a lot of students that they should definitely take that out.

15:06
their minds and call to something that they can feel close to them. know, like if it is art, it's art. If it's a sport, it's a sport. Or it can be many things. Or it could be many things. Because I think, think, um, but just doing one thing, uh, for some people it works, for some other it doesn't. And thatĺs, and I think that's fine. One of the, um,

15:34
That's why I was really enjoying the conversation on being hyperactive. Because I think we both do a lot of things. Right now, you have uh Taverna, have a beach restaurant, beach club, Crania. You have Meza Nomad, that's where we've met many years ago. When did you start it? think it was like... Seven years ago. Yeah, so that's when I think I went to the second or third. Yeah. Meza Nomada at the time, which is a pop-up restaurant. While I was working at the Lidio at the moment. you go. With Monica Patino.

16:04
I was working at a very famous place here in Mexico while I was doing my first entrepreneurial movement. Yeah, because I had the time because I could feel that I could have the time, you know, and of course that you have the time or you make the time because I it's something that I struggle a lot which is like oh you're never put just yesterday I was telling you at 6 a.m. I was in Tahoe then I denied I was in Reno then at 11 I was.

16:34
in Vegas and I arrived here at 7 and a friend of mine is like let's go to Temascale and I went to do Temascale until 12 and I was working in the plane and this is like I don't like to be quiet, It's like the whole stillness I meditate every day but that's fine. It is like then when people are like don't you just rest? I rest by doing things but for a long time I've been told that no you have to be well with yourself. I can be well with myself while doing things. How do you manage this? Do you think this is?

17:04
it a defect of personality, is a fault of personality or is it a type of personality? Like, it's just about being active, hyperactive or an adventurer, an explorer because there's this sense of adventure that you always need. I think it's definitely a type of personality that if you use it correctly, with the help of other people, you can manage to...

17:31
accomplish a lot of stuff that you want to do. When I realized that I wanted to be a chef, was until I did it. know, like the first moment that I put myself into, in a kitchen professionally, that moment I was like, oh wow, this is it. This is what I want to do. You know? So, answering your first question, you make the time.

17:56
Of course, you make it, but you have to be organized as well. And sometimes, as I was, you're not. Because you don't know what you want, and you don't know what you like, but you do know what you don't like, and you do know what you don't want. So first, I would start getting away of those in order to find what really, really, really motivates you. When I was in the Lidio,

18:24
and I did my first entrepreneurial movement, I found the time and I made the time because I was motivated to create. And that was what really made me happy. Of course, I was doing extra hours because I was working regularly in the other place, in my other restaurant, but I had to make an extra effort into making my first company, which is Meza Nomad. It's been seven years now.

18:52
And still, I still have to do that.

18:54
Because that's the way I created it. I created the time for that company to exist. And creating businesses is a type of creativity as well. Of course. Exactly. And that's they don't teach you in business school at the beginning. They're only like, it's more like, well, that was when I was studying. I don't know, maybe now they do. They don't change much education. yeah, like there's a lot of creativity into creating companies.

19:25
and creating business. This is sort of like mindset that they don't teach you and they donĺt really tell you that can happen. When they talk about, when people in universities talk about art, for example, they use a lot of the word of creativity and creative environments, you know? And now offices, of course, have been changing into better environments for their employers and employees to...

19:54
have a better relationship with their work. But still,  what happened to me, specifically  seven years ago when I started my first company,  is that even though  I was working in  what I really wanted to do, which was cooking,  and I had a good job,  and I would say that  good salary, regular salary in Mexico City,  I was not completed. I wanted to have my own stuff.

20:19
That is one of the things that really motivated until now, to have my own expression, my own voice. But you have to go through all these years and maybe for me it came too soon, maybe. Let's go a little bit back to Brazil. So, you arrived at Brazil. I arrived at Brazil and uh to meet a friend of a friend that was opening a restaurant. Who I didn't know. Who you didn't know, okay. And now does it go from there?

20:45
How was what? oh How did it go from there? Okay, it was fun because...

20:51
course that's... You arrive and it's like there's a restaurant, there's no restaurant. The place was cool. It was in the beach which... Where about? In the Sur of Brazil. You've had some of the best locations of work. You work at Burning Man, you've worked in Tulum, you've worked... Cranies in Los Cabos. This the Lari of Cambori˙ which is very close to Florianˇpolis which I went as well. Which has a very interesting reputation. Yeah, Copenhagen, Thailand. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Always close.

21:21
nature always close to nature but go a little bit let's go because then you also were accepted I believe at noma yes at a certain point but let's go brasil so you get there you get to the beach exactly brasil I went got to beach got  uh picked up by this  beautiful woman Sabrina which I was going to stay with and we were going to open her restaurant again she had a restaurant before  she closed it down

21:48
And now she was going to do something different, which is a Mexican restaurant in Balnear Camarillo. And I helped her to develop for the first one month and a half, but she realized that it was not going to happen properly. So, she decided not to open.

22:06
And that's when things got really interesting because when I got to Brazil, I had a home to where I could stay, you know, in her house. I was fed. I had like sort of like an income if you want to say it like that. But I had something secure. And then suddenly life just took it away and said like, okay, restaurant is not going to open. You have to move from this house in one week and find a job. I was depression then.

22:35
was supposedly getting out of depression. But did that make you more depressed, or did that actually make you know what, have other shit to Yeah, that put me on the limit. But I would say that I had two options. Either go back to Mexico to do things that I already know or just push, know, like try to do something different.

23:00
I stayed in Brazil, I struggled a lot, I went through withdrawal.

23:06
situations even though I was not addicted to any drugs or alcohol  my body went to literally the faces of withdrawal when you're in  uh in recovery you know because of the medicines you were taking no because my mind was addicted to  my comfort zone in Mexico my mind was addicted to my car to my house to my bed to the people that I know  and when I took them away just like from one second to another

23:33
Of course, my mind and my body went into a So I struggled and I was suffering with lot of anxiety every fucking day. Sorry. And I was going through a lot of phases, know, luckily, I was close to my doctor, and I could speak to him and say like, no, you are okay. Do not worry, worry. You will be fine. So, it is always good to have someone to help you. And then I started working in a restaurant. That made me happy.

24:03
I was busy, my mind was busy. How did you find the job? I found it online. And I just knocked the door.

24:09
lied about my resume  and  of course you could like I don't know in the business but maybe you can these guys  when you're lying and your resume  in a company or in the kitchen you can't  either you can cut something or you can't you know you can tell that  who's good at it  yeah because then when you get there it's like the skills are there exactly you need the skills  so I started cooking with this  uh French chef who

24:39
was very old school and taught me a lot, a lot of basics. To resume a little bit of the story of Brazil, it was an amazing experience, it changed my life. I started to feel myself again and I literally came out of the depression one year after. And that is the moment that I decided to go back to Mexico because I discovered that I was not enjoying myself in Mexico. But I love Mexico.

25:07
And I want to enjoy myself in Mexico. I mean, it is one of the most, it's my home. So after a year in Brazil, when I got to the point that I was feeling better with myself, after a long year of traveling and working very hard and sometimes sleeping in the beach because I didn't have home, blah, blah, came back to Mexico feeling amazing. And I started enjoying a lot of things that I couldn't before.

25:35
The depression made you a little bit blind. So, you arrived at Mexico, so you had a job and then you quit a job and I think at that point your dad is like, okay, now that you found it, again you're me? Again. So, I would say actually I wrote something down. I would say that in the last 11 years, my only habit that I have not changed has been the change itself.

26:05
So yeah, my father was very structured in this matter. Like he worked for the same company all his life probably. And when he saw me coming back, he's like, dude, what are you doing? Like you already had a job there. Why are you starting all over again? Because in my career at least, when it comes to cooking, I believe so. You need to learn a lot from many different places, from many different restaurants, and from many different chefs.

26:34
You need to have all this cultural experience all over as much as you can in order to learn what really cooking is because it's mixing ingredients, yes. But in Thailand they do it one way, in Mexico they do it another way. And maybe we share some ingredients, but the result is totally different. And what we are trying to create as chefs, it's an experience in the Palab. And with all these learnings, you can do your own.

27:01
So that's what I did before I got entrepreneurial. I went to Baja California, worked in a boat. I went to Mexico City. I went to Los Cabos. I went to Puerto Vallarta. I went to Thailand. I went to Copenhagen. And then Open Mesa Nomad. We had some visa issues in between though. Yeah.

27:27
Probably in Britain. In London. After they saw me coming in for the seventh time in the year, he was like, what are you doing here? I was not working there; I was just visiting. People can see the wink on the microphone. So yeah, was, so I started learning a lot from a lot of people. Then keep changing places.

27:56
keep knowing new people, keep meeting new people and getting new challenges was making me feel better. And that was what's making my mind go slower. Because when I get anxiety, itĺs because I feel unproductive. When I feel depressed, itĺs because I start to feel that Iĺm lacking something.

28:23
You know, so my actions instead of being of gratitude or abundance, which I had all my life, itĺs more of like, oh, I'm lacking this, I should do this. Great, exactly. And that's when you feel anxiety also with that because you are acting upon it. So, when I created Mesa Nomada, which was an...

28:46
course a business that was not making  any money but before that don't remember if it was before that or during that at the same point noma which is one of the top restaurants in the world that was after that was after that you were in Tulum but  I was in Copenaghan twice with them no first  I was with a one of the apprentices  or I mean it was  one of the right hands of united tippin which is

29:11
Thorsten Wilhelm and he had an amazing restaurant called Studio in Copenhagen came back to Mexico. Well, actually I got a job offer there. Yeah, it was one of my dreams. But I got the visa. Oh, that's the visa you were saying. Yeah. So no, my visa was rejected when I tried to apply for a job in Copenhagen, which I got offered. And that was one of the most amazing moments in my life.

29:36
Because that was what I was aiming for. When I started cooking, I was like, I'm going to go to this place. I'm going to work my ass off until I get that job. And I got it. But then, then what happened? The government of Denmark said no. You know, like, and they didn't even know me. It's like so crazy. So came back to Mexico, find a job at Delirio, place.

30:03
And that's where I felt that I had so much time because I could do my job and other stuff. And then I created Mesa Nomada. And with Mesa Nomada, again, I started traveling all around. put different... Can you explain the concept of Mesa Nomada? Yes. So, Mesa Nomada...

30:23
which literally means nomadic table. It's a pop-up experience, thinner program that involves a lot of art, has five main elements that, again, they're always changing and transforming. The venue, the people that are coming, the food menu, the design.

30:45
and architectural intervention, the sound, which we always invite different DJs or musicians to create a sound pairing with the menu that we're serving. And sometimes we would add a sixth one, which is the artistic intervention in which other kinds of artists would assist or intervene to space in order to make a beautiful experience. So, these pop-ups were normally one week or two weeks, sort of. It was like six to 12 dinners, maybe more.

31:15
this  in one place with a topic for example  the oceans  and then we would go into  with fishermen's until they're like okay  which many should we do and then same  with an architect or a designer  that he was into  the ocean okay now it's your turn to create  and transform this space and same with the musician

31:40
So, we started basically creating a new restaurant every time that we did a mesa nomada. And that's where we got our reputation and that's where someone called me and said like, Amy, we want to build a restaurant in Tulum. There's nothing but palms and sand and we need it in one month. And I was like, yeah, sure, why not? Easy. While I was running some events in Mexico City. And that same year, Noma went to Tulum.

32:08
And I already knew RenÚ for other experiences. So, I wrote him an email and like, hey, I would love to be in your team at Noma. And he's like, yeah, of course. They had a restaurant for six months, right? For three months. Three months. So, they brought, I remember each other, they brought like the tea. All the team. The family. Everyone. Made a school. Like everything. No, they brought things from Copenhagen. Like literally like things that they cooked for six months in Copenhagen. They brought it to Mexico. Incredible.

32:38
experience there was a moment that I was  running my restaurant in Tulum running and my restaurant was  Maxa which is now like one of the most famous camps at Burning Man that you also help manage and take care of like the food right exactly  so I was running that the restaurant in Tulum I was running pop-ups and events  from  Tulum in Mexico City  and I was working 14 hours a day at Nova

33:08
But I was so happy, man. And I was doing so much exercise at that time, you know, because my body needed it. And it's crazy, like.

33:17
If I didn't do exercise for more than two days, my body and my mind would get tired. I don't know if this makes any sense. It makes all the sense in the world. I need to sleep properly, but then I need to be active both physically and mentally. uh and that's a little bit how you were telling me that you deal with anxiety, depression, and everything, no? I believe that I get away from depression and anxiety when I exercise myself.

33:46
And when I am aware of how close depression is to me, you know, I can see it every day. It can really get into me any second. Just like, it's part of being aware and using meditation uh tools and skills to know that if I'm partying too much, I could go into depression very easily. Or if I don't do exercise for a certain amount of time, I could go into depressive state as well.

34:14
It's crazy because I really feel relaxed. I don't feel tired. I actually feel like if I just had a beautiful nap, 45 minutes nap, when I do a good run, a good long run, know? Runners high. Yeah, runners high or whatever, or just push-ups or surfing.

34:35
And it's really crazy because I think that's part of a hyperactive mind is that you need this. You need to keep your mind busy or your body busy in order to focus your mind on something. This really helps me a lot and for people who are now in university as well.

34:52
I would totally recommend these skills as well. Just like combine it. Combine with something that you really enjoy doing it and apply that two times, three times a week in order to make your life easier and happier. I think that's the key. And so, you were learning this while you were in Tulum. You had all these projects. weĺre living like totally full life. And knowing you, I'm sure you were partying a bit as well. Oh, course. But you're good. Like no depression, no anxiety. All good.

35:22
And so, then you're at Noma and whereĺd you go from there? Then I exactly so Noma closed down Max had closed down. was only a temporary restaurant. I went back to Mexico City and then well again, I went to London I started doing mesa Noma there to Portugal where we've met Portugal as well.

35:45
Different countries, you know,  and I could see a lot of opportunities  and then I went to Noma in Copenhagen again  Did you ever have in the back of your mind like maybe I should be more stable or maybe I should like yes because if I like a continuous thing because my life is too erratic or not Yes,  but not because I thought it because people told me to you know, it's crazy. You have to grow up You have to mature like not Yeah, there were people who were like, I mean, when are we going to settle down?

36:15
I get that question every week it's like no eventually you'll be more mature it's like hey I am mature I run my own life I'm happy it's like I just choose to live like this it's like well honestly after three or four years of mesa nomadad that's when it really got profitable and I was man honestly making way much more money than any other cook could make in Mexico

36:44
city  with  half of the time invested yeah  and that's the thing like I was doing my own menus I was doing my own menus which is something that someone really expects as a chef like you want to have your  own creations and your own creativity  so check one  I was literally  man working half of the time  of a regular cook  in Mexico city in a very good restaurant  and I was earning four times more than them

37:15
And I was traveling a lot.

37:17
And I was getting paid for that. still people are like, you have to find a stable job. Why? The goal is not work more, it's enjoying what you do, making a good living. I was just living a, I mean, a retired life. was literally living a good life. And of course, I remember a few years ago, was having lunch with a friend of mine and he was telling me, David, no, was giving me like all the speech, like, oh, you have to change life.

37:46
to a certain point that I have listened to these so many times and I was like, man.

37:51
How much do you earn? Oh, I earned this. And now what was your vacation? Oh, my vacation was like this last year, but because of the kids, because of the... And you almost, it was almost about being divorced as well. It's like, man, it's like, I don't want to compare anything, but I've made like six times more than you did. I had four months of vacation and I'm enjoying my life. So, I don't understand why I have to follow your path. I don't tell you to follow mine. And I respect that you.

38:21
worry about me, but just chill, relax. It's like there are different paths in life. Exactly, and I think that's what really complements what we were talking about, making time. When you're very hyperactive, you are very creative and you make time for a lot of things that you want to do. And it's very important to choose really between having one kind of life or another or another or another. And all of them are fine.

38:50
There's a lot of combinations that you can do with all kinds of hyperactive minds. In my very specific case, I got told a lot that...

39:01
when are you going to put your restaurant? I really wanted to put my restaurant, of course. Which I've done. Which I've done. Now you have two. I actually, I put two in the same year. So, I'm doing one. So, before that, there's a lot of people who said like, it's not a myth. A restaurant, having a restaurant, it's very complicated. It's very demanding. You don't own a restaurant. A restaurant owns you. Basically.

39:30
Of course, it depends on the category but...

39:33
Taverna is not uh casual dining. It is but let's get to Taverna because there's also something very  interesting there is that you work with your partner, with your girlfriend,  Chris, which I love  and you guys have managed like a beautiful relationship in the middle of  working together  and not living together but like you've managed all these great dynamic as well so like basically there's no  real separation between personal

40:03
professionally living life like one. But how did you get to this? How did you get? So, you got from Noma, you go to Noma again in Copenhagen. then? and I met seven years ago at Mesa Noma because my business partner at that moment knew that we needed someone to do very good desserts and we were not good at it. So, he invited her.

40:27
into Meza Nomada, that's where we met. were only friends, super like, you know, really like only friends. And then she went to do her own career, and she went to New York, to Blue Hill and Australia, Attica, Naveen, Thailand, all amazing places, very good restaurants all over the world. And then we met again in Tulum.

40:51
And still nothing was like happening there, but only after that. When I was back in Noma again in Copenhagen, we were there together. And I mean, before that, you know, like we always worked together. Before we became friends, we were working together. And I think the only thing that makes us very good at what we do when we're working together is because we're very passionate. We're very passionate and at the same time...

41:20
We're very emotional. We understand how the industry works and how you can get very depressed into this industry if you don't handle emotions correctly. Because there is an old school in this and they are mean, mean, they burned you man. And we do not want this. So before building our personal and love relationship, we built a work relationship and then a friendship and then...

41:49
Now that we have a place together, we can uh work oh in the ambience that we really want to design. And this is our creative as well. So, in Copenhagen, we were working together and we saw many things, and I am not judging, of course, and I'm not saying that they're not amazing, but we saw a of things that we don't want in our lifestyle. And that's very important to discover in the process of life.

42:17
So, when we were back in Mexico City and things were starting to work out between Chris and I, one thing that really, really, one of the things most important of our relationship is that we didn't follow the rules. That's something that has characterized me as well, my personal and professional life. Of course, I didn't follow the rules. I just did what I felt was right. And with Chris, it's the same.

42:45
Instead of jumping into our relationship straight away because we feel attracted to each other, we waited. Because we had other things to lose. There are two things that I remember. There are two things that I remember from... uh.

43:15
In Mezcal Amores last year, in Los Cabos, in Crania I was watching you at a certain point I was just like chilling somewhere and I was watching you guys and you had been working the whole day and I had seen you I don't know many meals you prepared a whole

43:31
and I saw you guys the two of you  after finishing  the dinner  and serving everyone  the two of you guys in a corner next to the restaurant  having a drink the two of you and laughing  and that's something else like man like relationship goals here  it's like they've managed to work the whole day under pressure  and now they are still not tired of each other  they're just like  hanging out  laughing and you still

44:01
DJing, having a good time while you were playing. she was cheering and dancing and I was like, whoa, relationship goals. Something in your relationship. Well, we don't know what it is, so we're not going to say it as well because we don't want to jinx it. Nah, I mean, it's only that, you know, like it's...  She is also very hip-hop.

44:27
The only difference is that she has a different set of goals, but I respect that, you know, and she respect mine. So, both being super active, hyperactive, with different goals, personal goals, and also relationship goals, and being aware of that and respecting both of them and create, being able to create these spaces of respect and, you know, like...

44:55
even we don't need sometimes we don't understand we just let it flow we don't put the rules and that's when you have a blank space and you don't have any limits  able to create  that's when you can when you can do whatever you want so that's what it is you know like we don't set limits into our relationship unless  something happened you know or unless something  someone really wants to  say something  but  normally  we just understand each other  and we understand that we are different persons

45:26
We're both very creative in different ways. We just managed to work it out. It's fantastic. I always love watching you guys working together when I go to Taverna or when I see you. And now let's go a little bit into the spiritual side. You said at the time you had like more like a psychiatrist and then you had at the same time as well a more spiritual guide or...

45:54
doctor, how you want to call it. How much spirituality have you been important in your process throughout? I know you've worked as well with medicine plants as well. Yes, spirituality has always been important in my life. I was educated Catholic, I'm not anymore. But I've always felt this beautiful, amazing energy within me, you know, that made me trust myself. Because it's something that you can feel.

46:22
Yeah, so spirituality, it's always been, as I said, uh very important in my life. I always felt this energy within me, which is beautiful. How do I know that it exists? Because I can feel it. There's always, thereĺs an uh exercise that I love to do to all my friends, family, whoever I meet and go deep into these kinds of conversations. It's like, close your eyes. And...

46:51
Tell someone to touch you. You know? Tell him to tell you when this person is touching you. And the only way you can see if this is true is because you can feel it. You can really feel it. You know? That's what I feel when it comes to spirituality. There's something there. I can feel it. All the time.

47:20
When I was a kid, I didn't know this, I did like meditation exercise that no one taught me. It was just like my consciousness doing this, trying to fall asleep when I was a young kid, because again, my mind was just like overthinking and running through, I don't know what, what kind of eight-year-old think about overthinking, you know?  I mean, many stuff, but at that moment, it...

47:48
sort of like gave me anxiety as well. So, I developed three exercises before going to sleep that helped me go into a rest, you know, and they were all guided by breathing, crazy. So, it was only after I started doing conscious meditation that I realized that I was doing it for many years. I have been doing it for many, many, years.

48:17
That was, I would say, right after Rasheel. Because the spiritual guide that I had at that moment was more like, he was more focusing on my emotions. uh

48:35
I am sorry, there's a great podcast living in Mexico City. We have to have a background of someone screaming grabadora. That is true. I think this is perfect for the people of the podcast. It's perfect because it breaks a little bit of the ice as well. We were going too deep. So, itĺs a noisy city. The noisier wins.

49:04
So yeah, like I started to develop a better spiritual side of me because I started to work on it consciously. After I began to do more exercises and meet more people and doing medicine, I started to feel better and discovered myself in a different manner. That has always been there. It just needed to make the time.

49:33
to see myself as a spiritual being as well and discover myself in that matter and then be creative with my mind in that spiritual world which is super helpful because that is pure imagination man. When you meditate sometimes, they tell you to put your mind as blank as you can or to...

49:58
think of nothing, no? And that leads to white canvas. Then what are you supposed to do with that? I mean, I'm not a monk. You're just pain, it's great. You know, like, in my mind, it was not the need to be in Tibet praying 23 hours a day. I can be now in peace with that. Because...

50:23
course. But that's another thing. Everyone is like, no, the ultimate goal is for you to be still. Or the ultimate goal is for you to be rich or for you to be the CEO of a company. I remember actually a person close to me was like, wanted to do Ayahuasca. And one of the questions that I remember listening to the person saying it was...

50:51
But what happens if I go there and then I don't want to become a CEO any longer? I was like, that's because maybe at the beginning you didn't want to become a CEO. That's fine. It's like, it's just like the way you were raised.

51:06
that everyone has told you and what you believe is that you have to be a CEO. I'm a CEO of several companies as you know and my goal is not to be a CEO. like because the other part it's like it's a lot of work and sometimes it's not even the most creative work and  there are more fulfilling jobs and  but people tell you no for you to be happy  you have to be at the top you have to be the boss you have yeah  no you don't  yeah or you don't have to be  meditating 20 maybe

51:36
People do it's not the same formula for everyone. The other extreme would be why are you You're not you're not want to you don't want to live in this entrepreneurial world which the more companies the more the president of the

51:53
Several companies, know, like if you don't want to live like that, there is another option That's what they tell you  and it's to go  and pray and have a  very simple life  in which you wake up  you Meditate you drink your tea  and you're happy with whatever is happening in the universe,  right? That's what they tell you and of course, there's religions and there is a lot of people who can do that.

52:22
such like a surfer can, there are many kinds of surfers. There may be a body type that can surf better than mine. I truly believe that there's minds that can pray more than mine and that can meditate way more than mine. What happens when I meditate? Not to go into other topics, into my creative mind, into my hyperactive mind.

52:48
When I meditate, I see a white canvas. And then one of the teachers that I had, these spiritual teachers, told me like, well then, just like, go, you know, like create your own world there. Whatever makes you feel better. And he taught me how to do that by telling me a story of what he sees while he's in a meditative state. And that was so much easier that.

53:16
just like having this black, white canvas. So, every time that I meditate, I go into this place, and I interact with all the beings and all the plants and all the things that are in this place that I have created, that is real, because I have created it. And it depends on how I react and interact with this world is how I come back. Because sometimes I go often there to cure myself or to be aware of that, maybe.

53:44
my reaction upon someone was very aggressive or it was not the proper one. So I go, I judge myself there and I cure myself there. And I come back and say like, okay, maybe this is my lesson to learn, but I need this creative space. That's how my mind works. It's always like having ideas and yeah, sometimes. Yeah. And now let's get, let's get a little bit into, into the whole part of being a

54:14
a chef. The first question I have, is there a difference between a cook and a chef? Yeah, there is a big difference. Why is it? Yeah, you need to have, you need to study, which I didn't. You need a degree. That's what they say. So, a chef needs a degree. uh Iĺm. ding. hink it'it isvery, as I said, very passionate and emotional industry. And at the same time, it is a

54:43
Cooking is the most primordial thing that we have done before being the creative beings that we are. Let me explain it differently. In order to create music or a sound, or in order to enjoy the waterfall coming down out of a mountain, first you need to eat. First, you need to feed yourself. And after we humans develop the ways

55:12
to  cook  and preserve food enough time  to not worry about that then  we had the time  to  create other things but the primordial thing was food you know after we had food we had a shelter and then in these shelters  after we found the ways to preserve the food  we could paint  we could  show other people how to do it you know

55:41
So, it is very primitive. And you do it three times a day, at least. people who are lucky, they do it three times a day or more, you know? So, it is not something that you don't dance three times a day. You don't play music three times a unless you're a musician. But you eat three times a day. And that means that it's something that we need, that we really need it. So being a chef in an artistic...

56:08
professional and skilful way is very difficult to see it in our industry because you have to be one of the best. Otherwise, you're just a cook, just like me. You're a cook. You'll always be a cook learning until you...  So, a chef is someone that is a top cook. Exactly. That's the definition. I have all the professional skills, all the knowledge, all, know, not all of it, but a lot, you know, so you can...

56:38
He's like a master of masters. And of course, thereĺs in the universities, there's a professional degree. When you finish that degree, you come out as a chef, which means boss in France. that's where the word comes from, know, literally mean boss. So, who's the boss? The chef. It's not the boss, the cooks.

57:07
So maybe for some people, I am a chef. I'm pretty sure that for other people, I'm not a chef. I'm still a cook. And tell me something. Because a few years ago, we did a class here at Leeds, actually. And a conversation we had is the comparison between managing a kitchen and managing a company. Right now, you're launched as well, Muerta, which is a Marigold's beer.

57:34
which is a very traditional flower here for the Muertos in Mexico. You have all the other businesses you're managing. How does it compare? How many people do you have working at Taverna now? Taverna, the whole team, I believe it's like 35 people.

57:52
So, managing a company and a restaurant, of course, are very different. That's why they have different degrees as well in the university. And they teach you hospitality in one of the universities and others they teach your business. At the end, they are both structured now and thereĺs always new develops and technology that can make both of them very easier.

58:21
technology into cooking that makes our lives as cooks so much easier and that we can get to the results that we want with less effort. Which can be contradictory for very old school people. But if you know the techniques from the past and you apply the technology of the future, I don't see a problem there. So, I don't think there's a big difference as a general matter, but

58:51
Of course, when you go into the industry, there's a big difference. Because when you operate a restaurant, you are engaging with your client every day, face to face, eyes to eyes, and very easily they will tell you if they don't like it. It's immediate feedback. Immediate feedback. So, it's a good thing or a bad thing. It depends on how you can take critic. And that's what we are cooks very passionate about. know, like we are addicted to these...

59:21
rush into knowing if it was good or not. And that's what we're fighting every day for. To create something that's probably the same dish, but all the ingredients are different. The goal is to create it the same, to have the same result every day, every day, every day. Consistency. Consistency, but with different ingredients. You, see? I mean, yes, there are tomatoes, but all tomatoes are different. It's not the same ingredient. So, it's very different because when you program a computer,

59:51
to running some numbers in Excel. I'm just generalizing, yeah, of course. Nobody's that very to ourselves. Or whatever program you use now to make accounts. I think it's the same number. But in the kitchen, it's not like that. we, as restaurateurs and experienced providers, we play with something very, very special that no one else do, which is the emotion.

01:00:21
our clients. So, if our client is happy, he will be happy all meal. But if he's mad since the beginning of the meal, it's going to be very hard to get him from this state to a happy state. But if we do, then that means we're good. Because he was very primitive. We touch his gut and he said like, okay, you know what? Forget about everything I was bad for. This is good enough. And tell me something, how do you manage your team? The people.

01:00:51
Because it's a lot of pressure, like because you have immediate feedback, food has to be consistent, food has to be with the right temperature, like everything has to work like clockwork. How does it, how do you manage stress, how do you manage expectations, what are your key challenges? I would say I'm not the best, again, because that means that I would have learned a lot and there wouldn't be nothing more to learn but...

01:01:19
uh One thing that we have been doing very good is that we have been teaching people to really care without that, without being stressed or aggressive. You know, because in the past, in old school, that's what they taught you. If you were mad and you would throw a pan into someone, just shouted at him or maybe hit him, that means that that person is caring a lot for what the other wasn't. Now we are managing people into different.

01:01:48
kind of conversation and treatment in which we make them feel and let them feel how important is their job, you know? Because whatever they do, people will feel it and they will taste it. People will notice. And for us, for example, Chris and I in our restaurant in Taberna, itĺs so important, the details. So, we're there and we just like let them know every day and tell them how important it is to have everything correctly done.

01:02:17
Because we care, because Chris and I care so, so, so much that we're there, weĺre there to teach them. This new school that we're trying to create, that it's already there, thereĺs many more chefs doing it, is a solution into bringing a better environment into the kitchen without making people care less. And actually, you can tell much easier now who cares and who doesn't.

01:02:46
Because there's a lot of people that even though that without this aggression, that you try to motivate them in a different way and they actually filter themselves. They're like, you know what? This is not what I want to do. Who are your role models? Who do you think are like really good people that you admire, that you've learned a lot from? Well, itĺs difficult to tell because I had some really good chefs that I was working with, role models into creativity.

01:03:15
course famous people  like Reuber and Tornado Tempi and  just all these amazing  creative minds that cook  and create new kinds of cooking you know like  it's like scientists I was impressed I was in Barcelona at a show  from El Bulli  I was impressed  I was like these are not these are scientists like  level of uh alchemy yeah

01:03:44
Ferran Adriano? Yes. Yeah, it was unreal. And now he created a lab out of El Puyo, right? Yeah. He's mad. And it's incredible to see him work. And then on the other hand, I've worked with, for example, Thorsten Bilgard, which he is one of the most passionate chefs that I've ever seen in my life. And he comes from Denmark. He was working with RenÚ RÚsepi at Noma for many, many, years.

01:04:12
So, he had this also this crazy old school habits. then I mean, I'm sure that before going into the Meretsepiet Nomad, was working in a very old school French type restaurant in Copenhagen as well. But he transformed his way and I really look up into him because the way he treated me when I was in Copenhagen was the way that I want to treat my people and the way that I want to make them feel how special they are and how...

01:04:41
amazing food they can do. Because that's what I felt. know, the way he treated me. When he was hard, he was not screaming. He just like approached me. He was very serious and tell me, Eme, you have to do it this way, this way, this way. You know, like he was very specific and he would let me know that he was disappointed, if you want to say it like that. Because he was expecting from me, you know, from everyone in the restaurant, everyone. So that's what I was trying to say when...

01:05:11
you make them feel special you know and this guy was some point  plus he was  he is very creative yeah it's one of the best I would  say  and  now going on nutrition that is more and more important how do you eat  actually very bad very bad  just eat at the restaurant whatever is like  quick bites  I'm very lucky because of my metabolism is like very you're like a trash can yeah I can eat whatever

01:05:41
I am leader. I have no hangovers, I'm very good. So, Changes with age, let me tell you. As I'm you, just change it every day, it will adapt. My habits of food are not very constant, but I try to eat two good meals a day, and then the rest I'm just picking stuff. I try to go into...

01:06:12
vegetarian, maybe every morning. And then sometimes, I don't know, I just listen to my body. Sometimes it asks me for food, for meat, sometimes it doesn't. But when I was living in the ocean, that is the best because I could eat seafood every day for the rest of my life and I would be happy. So yeah, easy. Like really depends on the type of body that you have. I would say listen to your body.

01:06:40
There are more trends. remember a few years ago I was looking into food tech and I remember meeting someone that was like before going to the restaurant, you'd send them some saliva on a Q-Tip and then they would do the Flavors according to your DNA or something. I've just done microbiome. I've done recently like my microbiome tests and I've learned things like

01:07:05
I'm allergic to or I shouldn't eat tomatoes. Actually, I've learned this at Taverna with Santi that he told me about these tests. And I didn't tell him, it's like things that you grow up like learning about now, like cauliflower is good for you. And for me, never, and broccoli, and I do like them, but they never felt like that they were healthy for me. And I realized I shouldn't eat them, tomatoes.

01:07:29
So how you think, like, what you see coming in the restaurant and hospitality industry? What do you see as the big trends that are coming? Well, more opportunities for sure. Thereĺs, as we grow as human beings, we discover so many things that we didn't know, of course, from the past with these new technologies, especially science technology, which can let us know with our DNA or with the study of our ancestors, what kind of diet

01:07:58
they were having. So now what kind of diet you should be having because of that because you have a heritage as well of neurons and cells. I mean, if you have heritage of how your hair looks because you're Portuguese or because I'm Mexican, you also have these memory cells in your stomach that are used to eat some kind of diet because of your ancestors. This is very...

01:08:28
good for the industry because we go more specific with every year and we go super local as well. We thought it was local five, 10 years ago. Now  it's  like people are  harvesting their own food in their own houses, you know, like that's super local  and there are supermarkets that now  are going to be  harvesting their own vegetables  in the supermarket, you know, so  what's going to happen with the industry? Just going to go more local, more specific.

01:08:58
and with that, it's going to have more opportunities because every person is different, every person has different tastes. There's a different experience for every kind of person. And if you like tacos and you find, we probably haven't found the right tacos that you really love because we haven't found them. You might know that you have your favourite right now, but maybe in 10 years, they discover a new recipe out of the combination of Mediterranean and Chinese that they apply now.

01:09:27
And in 10 years is the new Tacos al Pastor, you, see? So, when it comes to whatĺs going to happen with the industry, I just see more opportunity, restrictions as people say it sometimes are just guidance in order to focus more into what we can do in that area. For example, vegetarians, vegans. That's amazing, vegetarians, vegans. Amazing. I mean.

01:09:55
I don't see why vegetarian or vegan food should not be tasty. Yeah, but before like, before it wasn't. It was not tasty. It wasn't. Like, I remember like in Portugal, maybe like, I don't know, 15 or 20 years ago, trying to be vegetarian, I felt like a cow. Yeah. Everything is like, oh, you're a vegetarian. Here you have some lettuce and tomatoes. I was like, what the hell? Yeah. And now you go to amazing vegetarian and vegan places. You don't miss the Even taco.

01:10:22
Like yeah, the burgers like a beyond meat impossible burgers there are exactly I don't know how healthy they are, but they're definitely tasty. They're probably healthy because I mean they are trying to achieve this nutritional subject as well, you know, they're not just aiming for the flavour. That's one of the most important things right now in our century is that food not only should be tasted it should be nutritional because it's the first medicine. I don't know if it was sorbet is a

01:10:51
It's the most primitive thing that we have. So, having a good meal, even if it's vegetarian or vegan or not, or maybe something different, itĺs an adventure, it's exploration into the future like insects, you know? They say they are...  Chapulines, the grasshoppers. the food of the future. I agree on that. There is so much that we have not explored into insects and we have so much more in Mexico and ironically...

01:11:20
It is something that our ancestors used to eat, like a lot, way much more than meat, you know? We had it in many dishes, in traditional Mexican dishes before the Spanish came. So, self-exploration into technology, addressing specifically certain kind of person and their very specific kind of experience or taste that they want to have.

01:11:45
Which is the same that you are having actually with internet as well. It is the personalization, understanding the person and customize the products to each person. And one last question, and what is next for Eme? You just have like six or seven projects going now. I am sure you're not happy. No, I'm kidding. No, actually, well, this year, this year is more about focusing on personal relationships as well.

01:12:12
could see that last year it seems like you've been disappeared like I think we're even afraid of calling you because you're always busy no please call me we have a pending trip  please call me because that's the thing like uh last year  opening two restaurants  on the same year  launching my beer  and doing some other professional uh things  made me separate a little bit from my social life even though I love partying and I like when I

01:12:42
I out, I hung out, but all the personal relationships that I really built last year was inside a professional situation or in taverna, which is my workplace. And now I want to hang out more with other people, know, because that's in Mesa Nomada when I was doing that before. I really kept me motivated and inspired to meet a lot of people and to see what they were doing. Also, I want to do something more casual.

01:13:12
Of course I went to another restaurant. Keep working on the arts, my music, and my photography. like, you know, like having a happy life and traveling, enjoying my relationship with Chris. So, this year I think I worked a lot last year and following the advice of the ambassador of Mexico in Switzerland, she said that you were working with us as well. Yeah, I was there last year.

01:13:39
She said like, Emma, very proud of you. You're doing amazing. But you know what? You need to take a moment to see what you're doing. Just like enjoy it. Just don't forget to enjoy what you're doing. I know that you like to be everywhere and do all this stuff, just like, don't, don't, I'm not telling you to stay still or stay put. Just remember to take some time to enjoy it. And that's very important. Yeah, that's very important. Okay. And I think that's a great way to finish our conversation, to take some time.

01:14:09
and enjoy it. um Always such an amazing pleasure talking with you and I hope we do that trip soon. Yeah, let's do it. Thank you so much. oh

01:14:21
Next week we will have Vinny Olympio telling us his adventures from being born in the slums of Brazil to becoming the creative director at Apple in San Francisco and leaving it once again to follow his life purpose. Join us then. If you enjoy the show, please subscribe to our podcast on Spotify or wherever you listen to your podcast. You may reach out to us for commenting, giving suggestions or just sayáhi byáemail X@LITSáAdventures.com, Twitteráand Instagram at LITS Adventures andáLinkedIn LITSáAdventures. LITSáis L-I-T-S and standsáfor Lifeáis Too Short.áLITSáXáPodcast is a result of the teamwork between BeatrizáChosa, JanosáSchuyer,áLydineáMarieáPridrich, SigurdáKolz andáDavid Bernardo Santo. Please remember that more than providing answers, LITSáXáPodcast aims to raise awareness and questions about topics that are becoming relevant and discussed in society. The podcast reflects the personal views of each of its participants and not any institutions.áIt'sánot in any way meant to give investment,áhelp, medicaláor any other type of advice. Many of the topics addressed are still not fullyátested,áconfirmed,áor approved. So please question everything youáhear andáexercise extreme caution.á
