Episode 21

00:00
emergency 24-hour bag, I take you guys out, lie in the snow with this bag. The wind's blowing really strong and we don't want to be blown off like the other helicopters. So, doors open, you're coming out this big howling thing, you're lying in the snow with this bag. And at that point, because it's so clear so, there's a wall coming in like this, the weather, and you can just see down to basically two tiny helicopters taking off down there, say it's a hot desert, first unique buildings in cities.

00:28
walls go, and then the trees go, and then the bushes and then the grass goes. All of those things that hold us, that sort of keep us safe. And there's nothing that's just the sun, or the ice, or the water. The perspective goes. There's nothing to hold us. It's going to hold our mind. And it starts to unravel. And so, I faked, so I made a little name badge, saying Toby Strong, I put it on. I think it was from the back of the

00:57
cereal packet, put it on. And so, I snuck into this thing and there were free drinks, I had too many. And I found myself, for some reason, was this giant stuffed grizzly bear. And I found myself sort of leaning on this thing, a little worse for wear. And then this gentleman walks up, he says, ah, you are Toby Strong. You're the one who wants to spend a year in the south of France filming with me. And I went, yes.

01:31
Sometimes I meet people that impromptu I want to interview for the podcast since I'm so impressed by them. Toby Strong is definitely one of them. Toby has my childhood dream job. He's one of nature top photography directors and cameramen in the world.

01:50
is a multi-Emmy award winner, having worked with names like Sir Richard Attenborough, Martin Scorsese, and James Cameron. If you like wildlife documentaries, like National Geographic or BBC, you most likely saw Toby's work. He has been in every corner of the world with every type of animal. We spent time together in Ibiza, and his stories in the wild are just amazing and crazy, as stealing the food from the lions after they kill the prey. We're going to use Experience Udacity

02:20
animals, what he has learned from them, uses in his own life sustainability and his deep struggle with mental health. This conversation was definitely one of the highlights of my summer. Sorry for the quality of the sound, but we were in Ibiza and it was cicada season and they were very noisy. Here we go. Toby, thank you so much. uh

02:43
We are on the perfect setting to actually do the podcast and I've had the honour and the pleasure of being on vacation with you here in Ibiza  and  hearing about your amazing experiences and I'm really honoured that you're on the podcast and I'm so excited about all these projects we are talking about on collaborating  and I think you have so much to  offer to people from your experience that  I'm so excited about.

03:14
Thank you. That's what I'd say likewise. Just to me, it's a real honour to meet you and to hear your life experiences as well. We sort of moved through the world with very similar passions and integrity and morality, but on different paths. It's really beautiful to have what we've talked about so far and I want to explore with you now. I'm really excited about how we can come together.

03:39
it's an approach three sixty like we're talking about everything that you can learn for instance from wildlife and bringing into companies into relationships even into depression and mental health which is something that will go a little bit deeper um tell me about you.

03:58
Who are you? Tell me about your life experience. There was already the intro, and we speak that you have two Emmys, you're on the way for two more. You're actually in between filming with Martin Scorsese in Italy and you're on a short break here and you're on your way to Los Angeles this week or next week. it's like, and BAFTAs and you've worked with James Kev...

04:28
and you've worked with David Attenborough, Will Smith, like all these people that are a little bit like myths and legends. Who are you? It's really funny. Yeah, it's so funny when you hear that back at you. I grew up, I was born in England, in rural South England in a small village. And from a very early time, I was always looking beyond the hills.

04:57
beyond the next hill and I grew up banishing into books. I couldn't at that point banish so I disappeared into books on exploration. And just these explorers and amazing people around the world wanted to follow in their footsteps. When I went to school I didn't feel like I did at all and I did really badly and I failed pretty much every exam at school.

05:24
I had to retake years and all sorts of things. ah And I struggled at school with unhappiness, with bullying. uh I went to university and studied civil engineering, which I loved. ah I came from... My family, no one had been to university. And it was a real privilege to do that. And I wanted to do something like Swahili and archaeology. uh Art, the classics.

05:53
but I needed to do something useful. It would have been felt too frivolous to follow my heart. Yeah, So I did that. And that was that was, I don't have many mistakes. I feel I've learned from a lot of things, but regrets. One was doing that because it would be useful rather than what it was for my passions. So, I civil engineering and I came out with a very bad degree, but during it, I...

06:23
started to do expeditions and leading expeditions. And I thought that's what I would do, is I would physically take people. Which type of expedition? So, we went to North Africa and took about 16 people walking through the mountains and then climbed Jebel Toubkal, the highest mountain, and to Slovakia, walking through the mountains there. And I did my own traveling. And I did some with the army, and I got a commission in British army and a territorial army. And I learned a lot from that.

06:52
And I'm glad I did that training because where I thought my physical and mental limits where they were way over here somewhere and it was amazing quite early on in my life to realize I can go so much further. I think that's something like regarding education that you're talking about as well in the survival course. Learning about like how you become an animal and actually many of your limits are.

07:15
in your head. Like if someone tells you go and run a marathon now you say like no I'm not prepared I didn't train but if someone but if your family's life depends on it, you run two marathons right away and  learning that like and that mental toughness is very relevant. And I don't think you can learn that on your own because you're only going to go as far as you think you can go. You get on your comfort zone. Yeah, you get to the edge you go that's far as I can go and it's only through other people your guides your

07:45
masters, your teachers, your officers who are going to go, ah, you're going over there. Yeah, wow, I could run another five miles. I literally didn't. So yeah, and finding those limits early on was massively beneficial, even though I didn't sue that path. And then I bought a one-way ticket to Africa. I wanted to live there. I wanted to live in the bush and take people in and show them the wonder of Africa. Africa was this big thing.

08:17
And I almost lived in Botswana, I got residency there, and I came back to sort of say goodbye to my folks. uh and then I was introduced to camera work. And I realized that with a camera, rather than taking a dozen people, you can reach 12 million. And this power, such a powerful medium that you can show people the beauty of the world. I saw this beauty and I thought I had to take people and go, look at that, look at the beauty there.

08:47
You can show people how beautiful the world is. can say, look at this. And can also highlight injustice. You can highlight extraordinary people doing wonderful things that happen in their cause. So that's why I started on the route of filming and telling stories, visual storytelling in a way. And from there, I kind of bullshitted to spa. And I remember taking chances. remember

09:17
We all get chances. remember... Can you tell the Tovey story? I love that story. There are a few stories. there was... I was at the Wild Screens, the biggest wildlife festival. It's every year in Bristol, near where was, but I couldn't afford to go. And so, I faked. I made a little name badge saying, Tocastrum. I put it on. I think it was from the back of the cereal packet. Put it on. And so, I snuck into this thing and there were free drinks and I had too many. And I found myself, for some reason or giant stuffed grizzly bear.

09:47
I found myself sort leaning on this thing a little worse for wear. And then this gentleman walks up. He says, ah, you are Toby Strong. You're the one who wants to a year in the south of France filming with me. I went, yes. Yes. And he literally arranged to meet someone called Toby at nine o'clock next to the stock bed. I have no idea. You have no idea what that's over here. Literally to this day.

10:15
And that was my chance. And I spent... But did you have some experience or nothing? Very little. At that point, I had almost zero experience. Well, I had belief that I could do this, but no one would give me a chance. So, I spent then, spent a year in the South of France, making a film on insects and lizards and the people of the South of France. Then I came back and I was like, now I'm a cameraman. Silence. Give me a job, silence.

10:45
And at that time the BBC which was on one side of this road in Bristol and there's another company called Tigris on the other side both big companies They're both making programs on Africa. Neither of them would give me a job This guy called Patrick Morris on one side and on the other side uh

11:09
So, at that time, BBC and Tigris were both making a new series on Africa. They wouldn't give me the work. So, I went across to one side, and I talked to the guy in charge. went, so look, I've talked to the BBC on the other side of the road, and they're prepared to do a share, 50-50, cover of costs. They're good if you're good. This guy, Patrick, man, yeah, okay. I then went across to the other side and went, just talk to them. They're happy to do a 50-50 deal on this. And all if he's happy,

11:35
So, it was a risk, but yeah, they both agreed to it. And I've told them since, and I'm sort of both friends, so that was okay. But you've gotta take chances, and you've gotta say, yes, I can do it and then start reading and figuring out how to do it. And then, yeah, and I didn't go to college and train at all, and I really wouldn't recommend people do it. If you wanna be a filmmaker, make films and learn on the ground. And then, yeah, and for the next 25 years, I've been going to the World's Wildest Places.

12:04
And I've got colleagues who devote their lives just to wildlife and they're extraordinary. And within that, a long lens. That is their specialty and I pay homage to them. I personally, I personally love people and animals. I don't really see the difference at all. ah So yes, can, I’ve just been with raccoons in Vermont for a month. And next I was doing a project for Martin Scorsese in Sicily with people about chifra.

12:34
I love both those things. I don't really see a difference in storytelling. And I love to weave them and to weave genres. And so, I've done those and I've carefully trod my way between conservation, undercover work, it has been top end wildlife and then top end. Sometimes you have to. Sometimes there are many ways we need to get our story across about conservation. Whether it's making things like Planeta, Blue Planet, when you are making.

13:04
extraordinarily visually stunning things that will people will watch we only care about things we love so you and Jen are a passion hopefully amongst the young but they start to love these things by loving them they'll care about I was listening to  your interview on variety and one of the things that that you mentioned was exactly I make these movies it's not only about entertainment this is about creating a passion for

13:31
even younger generations so that they see the beauty there and that it's worth to be worried about, concerned about the lives. Exactly. So, we have that. And then we have more direct action to highlight what's wrong. We made a film, Warlords of Ivory, where we went into Congo, into Togo, and we went undercover.

13:55
We were in very dangerous situations. I've been in Congo, Girodda. It's literally a shit show. It's dangerous. With all my trips, think it was where I felt that I was more at risk with the whole guerrilla situation and all the... uh

14:17
the warriors and interest from the oil companies and everything. It's such a mess that... You do feel very powerless. On two occasions in there I thought, hmmm... So, we were in Caramba National Park, and the Rangers there look after, yes, the animals as best they can, but also the people, isn't no one else. And the Lord's Resistance Army heard we were there, texted through saying, we know you're there, we're gonna come and kill you. And we had to somehow try and get out.

14:46
We drove in through villages, smiling kids, everyone waving happy. When that text came through, we couldn't leave that night. We got a claim. Hopefully came in at dawn. We drove out, villages were silent. We were driving towards where the LRA were coming from to kill us. And we managed to get out of the barn. Over the next months, the LRA killed pretty much every ranger we worked with. From there, we went into China, undercover, and into the ivory carving workshops in Beijing.

15:17
And then we realized our phones were being listened to. It coincided with the Nat Geo. So, the story coincided with a Nat Geo cover article by the journalist Brian Christie, who's a friend who was on that. And someone leaked the story. It was like, cannot let this get out while we're in country. It's really dangerous. And someone had leaked it. So, we're in China undercover. And it's leaked this story.

15:45
We're starting, we're this, we're starting to hear phone calls and seeing people on phones looking at us and things. And we got out, but it was really touch and go. And also, you feel when you're doing that in China, you feel scared. uh So, so. A good guardian angel. I've got a few. I've got a guardian angel who practically was.

16:12
told us to get to the top of a building at a certain time and a helicopter would pick us up. He was a very practical guardian angel, and I only call him those famous fairy occasions. But yeah, so we do these things for gender passion but then we also need to do things like that. And that film changed Scyties policy, apparently. Obama watched it and it affected him burning the Irish stockpile in America, which then triggered to China burning their Irish stockpile. So, you can do direct action as well.

16:42
And I like to be able to do all those things. It's nice. What do think? Because you've been involved in so many different projects. And you have also these other fashion projects. Like you're supporting schools and villages where you go through. You have a store of furniture and homeware. And you want to promote fair trade with that education.

17:11
So, it's almost like a foundation work that you’re doing. What do you think is your life mission? Have you come across or you just uh played a little bit by ear and do what feels right? Well, I'm doing a civil engineering degree. I'm pretty much full in my heart.

17:32
There's so much I'm passionate about. And we'll talk about mental health. I suffered from depression my whole life. And I have these ups and downs. When I'm up, the creativity is really exciting. And I can get all these balls in the air. The problem is when I'm down, those balls have people attached to them, people I care about, whether it's relationships or business. And they suffer. And I have to somehow keep all these balls. So, life goals?

18:01
I get very excited about lots of things, but as I'm moving through life, I realize they are quite aligned. And you talked about a foundation, and it does seem as though everything does start to fit together. Be that. So, I think with regards to filming, engendering a passion for the natural world. And I want to show people there is beauty everywhere. And beauty is really underrated, particularly today. Beauty is really important. And people say, oh, with a $60,000 camera.

18:28
Serengeti, of course you see beauty. No, with your phone, with your $100 phone, in the rain, in England, there is beauty everywhere. And it's important to find beauty. I want to highlight injustice. I want to highlight those people who devote their lives on the ground, preserving and being guardians of our natural world. And I want to, with my shop, we support 65, 70 artists and makers who are trying to still keep going.

18:58
the crafts and arts, not just in England but around the world and to help them, support them and bring them all together with myself and my partner and that, with passion about sailing and to bring cell cargo to help people who are doing cell cargo and to trade. I want to take people on the ancient route through the Mediterranean trade routes and to people who have their lives on the ground, to growing olives and saffron.

19:26
Bring all this together and it's really important and making. Sorry if it sounds quite disparate, but for the last 100,000 years in the evenings we would sit with our hands and talk and communicate as we're doing now. And it doesn't really matter what you're doing, your hands are doing things. When I interview someone, I get them to do something with their hands. You can think about your hands doing something. It's a lot easier for them to become less conscious. I want to set up spaces for people.

19:53
programmer that served the young boy and they're both playing with clay. For them to communicate, we've lost a lot in my society, in England, we've lost community. It's to rebuild community. think a really important aspect as well that I've seen and also in the business world is the importance of

20:14
So, I have such amazing mentors that are so much older than me. And from mentors, they became friends. And now, for instance, even on ChatGPT, I've been teaching them about AI. I think there's, and I see the same thing when I teach at the university. And I see like,

20:37
people that are one to generations younger than me, how much I get from them. And this interchange, and I think as a society, we found a way of kind of like get rid of elders, where there's so much to be taken and it can be so much more fulfilling. But we just have this cult of beauty and youth.

20:59
in the end it's not that beneficial in society. thing that I haven't talked to you about that suddenly seems to be other than the I've had for so long is called the Sound Council. Where? There is so much, I get to work with so much wisdom within the indigenous world. I travel around. There is so much wisdom there that is being lost. There is so much power in relatively young people in business.

21:27
And I don't think they're properly supported. They do not have a community to support. There's almost a... We villainise these people who have this power in business. And what we need to do is to support. And what I want to do is this series of sound councils where people come in a round space, sit in the sand, around a fire, and they're supported. And yes, we can learn from the indigenous wisdom that is there and for these people to have a framework where they're supported.

21:57
And they can sit there and go, I'm really scared. I've got 200 employees. I've got 2,000 employees. Get up in the morning. I don't know what I'm doing. An old lady or an old man, that's OK. So what? That's normal. But it's just not to be one way as well. With new business and with new technology, we can support and help indigenous cultures, indigenous wisdom to be supported. Not to say, oh, now you must have this, now you must have this, but to support and go, OK.

22:26
Let's support your culture. Let's support but help with that. So, I would love to create a series of sound councils that are held and where these people are supported. I love that I met, was telling you think yesterday about how it was, when I was doing work. And just taking a couple of like tools.

22:53
to these communities developing ecotourism, giving them a reason why they should conserve their environment and protect it. Do like conscious tourism and we've helped them increase, I think, fivefold their revenues in one year. And at the same time...

23:16
preserve their culture keep the environment. Because they were going to do like tours, we can say like sometimes like no you have to keep them protected. It's very hard now. But if you're going to do it, at least do it promptly. And the alternatives they had were very simple. Lobster fishing, which basically they would get injured because of the depth of which they found lobster. And cocaine trafficking.

23:46
and we just gave them another option we can think, And I've learned so m. there. And I think if we can bring this to our society, I really love the idea. Yeah, and I think it doesn't just have to be Indigenous wisdom supporting.

24:05
business leaders, whoop, is the other way around. But it also is a cross-platform. So, I've been working on a project in Tahiti, and the people of Tahiti are doing extraordinary things. They've set up the largest shark conservation area in the world. They have kept their values and their indigenous culture so strong, and that's what they want. And they're a very large voice.

24:34
in the global community and a lot of what they're doing is really extraordinary, able to keep what they want and then to take little bits that are coming in to support them. And I think for other indigenous people or cultures that are struggling to learn from the Tahitians. And we can do that with film. We can physically take them to do that, but also through documentary.

25:02
and through lessons learned, can be, you know, we're not someone colonial coming in to tell you how to preserve this. And we do not want that. What we want is, as filmmakers, to be able to document the Tahitians and those lessons and to go, look, these guys over here, this is what they've learned. And, you know, do you guys want to get together? you know, for us as filmmakers and within the business world to facilitate this conversation to bring these people together, I think it could be really powerful.

25:31
Let's go a little bit into since we entered it, we've already entered several topics that we're going to go after. But let's go to conservation, which is something very important to you. So, you've been with every type of environment, ecosystem, habitats, all types of animals. And you've been into the wild for the last 30, 40 years.

26:02
What's your perception from someone that has been in the field? What's your perception about, which for me is very relevant, someone that has visited these places throughout time. What's really changing? Because we have people discussing with lot of political interests, climate change is real, it's not real, what have you seen? This will not be the...

26:28
positive points of the podcast. And the other thing I'd like to say at point is I'm not an expert in anything. I have a beautiful eye that I'm able to articulate to others. been there. But I'm a group of very few people who have been able to see a lot of the natural world. And in that I'm able to, I can tell you what I've seen, but without an expert viewpoint. I would say like I grew up like with National Geographic.

26:58
all these different documentaries, images, I think most of us have seen and are passionate about the natural world through your eyes and the eyes of people like you. Because like, I’ve had the chance to be in a few places, compared to you, it's nothing. And most people never were lucky enough to go there. So actually like,

27:26
We see the world through your eyes. So, within the last few years, I was in Antarctica and I was down there and there was an international group of scientists there. I was talking to the head of British Antarctic Survey, Thwaites Glacier. It's the biggest glacier on the planet. And it's there on the west Antarctic ice shelf. There's a little lump of rock that's stopping it to split off. It's going to go any second. As we're talking, it could be released.

27:57
It in itself will increase water levels globally by about 60cm. That's a fact. That will not change. The real fear is almost like a little piglet stuck in a doorway as the other piglets are trying to get out. The real fear is what's going to happen behind them. So, when that's released, a whole Western Antarctic ice shelf could go.

28:18
Estimated you could be looking at 20 feet plus global sea level rise. We don't know that. Thwaites is good. He was in London talking to the heads of London going, London is pretty much going be untenable within the next few years. And they wouldn't this because they don't know to do about it. Venice, Miami, those are cities that they're within the next few years. This that will happen. I was then uh.

28:47
on the Tibet border with Nepal. Again, with the British Antarctic Survey, we know how much the glaciers are retreating. We don't know how much ice is left. So, they had this huge boom like a sonar. They were flying in a helicopter around all the Everest valleys, taking measurements.

29:07
So, within about 50 years, in the winter it's fine. The rain falls on the Himalayas, and it fills the great rivers of Asia, the Ganges, Brahmaputra, the Indus. It gives everyone water. If you think about the Himalayas, that water is going into China, Pakistan, into India. In the summer, it's only the glacial meltwater giving everyone their drinking water. Within 50 years, we're gonna lose 40 to 50 % of the living off of more. An estimate I was told,

29:38
Within, before the end of this century, we're looking at about a billion climate refugees. In England, we're up in arms about a few desperate people coming across the channel because of terrible situations they're leaving. Just look over just the horizon, we're looking at a billion climate refugees. That will not change. I've been in Indonesia and I have seen the greatest rainforests raised to the ground now for palm oil.

30:09
I've seen the devastation to the oceans, the plastics floating in it. Recently in Kenya, I stood up to my waist in detritus, a lot of it from us, Europe, with little kids as the new lorries are un-dumping it and they're scrabbling through it to try and find Yeah, I saw that in your podcast. Yeah. That you were describing as you were walking through like...

30:38
trash. Yeah, and that is our trash.

30:44
The outlook was terrible. We'd crossed the line. I was with Sir David Attenborough in Kenya ah to do a piece on the last two Northern White Rhinos. There were three. There was a male. And I filmed him being loaded to come out to Africa. So hopefully they were made. He died. And we stood next to his gravestone. And it reads, here lies Sudan, the last male Northern White Rhinos.

31:12
We're at a place where we're losing something as emblematic and extraordinary as a rhino. They're now declared extinct.

31:22
Each day I think it's almost 200 400 species, but we'll probably lose they will not come back.

31:32
So, the outlook is everywhere I go. Even if it's not direct, I was in Mongolia with a family talking. The gentlest people who moved, there's no man to cross the plains of Mongolia.

31:47
Global warming is warming. The other effect is the climate change that means areas on the coast have that cooling and warming effect. In land, you don't get that warming effect. So, what's happening is the winters are getting more brutal. So, these herds people who have lived this way for tens, hundreds, thousands of years, their animals are dying because of the brutal winters. It's because of our actions the other side of the planet, these gentle people's lives.

32:16
of being destroyed. There is nowhere, and I talk to my friends who we do this job all the time, there is nowhere we have been where we are not seeing the effects of our actions on the planet. And people are, I think it's interesting because it looks all so remote. Yeah. And it looks, no, it's like, we'll just send some money to save the dolphins or whatever and it's all good. But people are not really understanding.

32:43
that they are actually talking about their survival. And not only about how it's going first, if it's going to get hotter, it's like, it's not that you just turn the AC up because you're starting to have like water crisis, you start having water crisis, energy crisis, like all these different things. But then there's also something that is very, people don't realize this when you have like a really strong.

33:14
human catastrophe emergency, need shelter, you need water, and you need guns. Because people start to revolt. And people think, oh, I'm here. Yeah, you're here. Until you get like a billion people that have to go somewhere. Safety is going to be an issue. And it's going to get to your front.

33:45
And it's not going to knock; it's just going to go through it. And you don't know what hit you. But we are just blind to it. And we will not change until we have to. That's not the human way.

34:03
Up until this year we talked to friends about this a lot and then this summer, literally now, I've just been in Sicily, it's 48 degrees and a lot of the island was burning.

34:17
It's only staying in Greece. So, it is knocking, starting to get closer and closer. The problem with elements of North America and Europe is quite temperate. So, the effects will be last. If you look at Australia last year, Australia has been on the front line for a while now with the wildfires. And because of that, an independent party who's running on climate change won. Because it is knocking on their door.

34:47
it is burning their door down. And that is why, finally, those people are getting into positions of power because it is the most defining thing. We're still worried about immigrants and job safety and other things. Yes, it's important to certain people, but very soon, this climate thing will be burning your house down and it becomes the most important thing. And at that point, it's probably too late. By the time that Europe is on fire, Northern Europe...

35:15
North America by the time they're on fire it's too late. What can we do? I think I work a lot with technology I think like people are like AI might help, yeah sure. ah Actually one thing uh nuclear fusion might help and bring energy almost free energy that we develop.

35:36
Those are all solutions that I think they are wishful thinking because they are not proven yet. What can people do in your opinion? Besides governments, it's like people that are listening to us. Yeah. I don't know. And I get really sad about it.

35:52
I don't have clear answers. Again, I'm not an expert. I just see these things. When listening to people who are a lot cleverer than I, they say as individuals, there’s very little we can do. But as community is a hive, we can. Through purchase choices. If no one bought factory-reared chicken eggs, none will be made. Almost instantly because there is no point if we stop.

36:21
buying plastic bags, they won't make plastic bags. So as per who we vote in as a community is a vital input. So, I think as a we have power. As individuals we have very little. That's where the strength and importance of community come back.

36:42
again, I personally don't know it keeps me awake at night but listening to wiser people than I that is what they have said and moving a little bit because I think another solution is creating conscious leaders and one of the things.

37:05
that we've been speaking a lot about with my experience also teaching at several business schools and the horse therapies as well which approaches me a little bit to like the animal world and the lessons. There's so much we can actually learn about.

37:23
animals’ wildlife that we can bring into relationships that we can bring into corporations that we can bring into our everyday lives, and we've been talking and I'm really excited about like collaborating with you on

37:40
this matter and bringing it to companies, it into universities. And one of the things that we've been talking about these days is like lessons that you can take. was taking some notes, I think, about some of the stories and I think this is going to be a particularly long podcast because I want to hear them in detail. um

38:07
have a couple of notes here. So, you have a story about going and get meat from the lions, which is a lot about self-belief. Can you tell us about the relevance of self-belief and that story with the lions? Yeah, we called it self-belief, didn't we? It was on a series called Human Planet, I think it made 13 years ago something. And one of the stories is with the Ndorobo people.

38:36
who live sort of in Kenya, Tanzania area. They are traditionally hunter-gatherer. The Maasai live in the same area, but the Maasai live more with cattle. And the Dorobo, the Maasai often don't know the Dorobo. They live in the shadows. And they have an extraordinary relationship with lion.

38:57
and often the Dorobo will be stalking an antelope, and they'll look over and lion are stalking the same one. They kind of very similar eyes and they have the same knowledge of the lion. But what they'll do is they'll wait. We waited with them in this overhang. It's beautiful rock with some cave art on them. Tens of thousands of years Dorobo waited. It was near dawn and they heard the lions make a kill.

39:26
So, we headed over there. We a Land Cruiser and my friend was filming on the Long Land, and I had the camera on my shoulder and we got that. It was a wildebeest. There were 13 lions, including some cubs. I've filmed lions for many years.

39:44
I love you saying on a podcast saying lions are the most boring animals in the world. We have to wait 23 hours. They do nothing. They sleep for 23 hours and then one hour you have to be ready for 23 hours for whatever it is. They don't kill something by the bush. Yeah, but you don't get out of your car. You stay in your vehicle with your tripod on and you're okay.

40:10
And I there, stood behind this Land Cruiser, and could see the lines over there. They're all E2. And the driver, and I can remember that director saying to me, you do not need to this, don't do this. was like, you're only going to get chance once in your life. And Rakita was the head guy. He must have been 60 or 70.

40:36
I was like, if he's been doing this his whole life, he knows what he's doing. And his age, he probably... Yeah. I was like, maybe if I do this one day, I'll get to talk on a podcast about it. It'll be a story worth it. So, the anchor is a pull away and they stand up and I'm behind them. And we start walking towards 13 lines on a kill. I've got my eye in the eyepiece like this, so I cannot see anything this side. This eye is doing this desperate scanning of...

41:06
They had no protection and like lionesses, when they come into the kill they'll sneak in on this like silent riot, waiting, this could be happening anyway. They didn't run, they didn't shout, they didn't bang anything. Eyes locked on the lions and they just walked calmly, straight in. I think they even talked amongst themselves, I don't remember. And the lions were there, they...

41:36
the apex predator in that habitat. is their world. Humans run from them. They know that. Yet these three humans were just walking, the funny one behind me, were walking towards them and it didn't make sense. Oh, and you were the last one. I was the last one at the, so it didn't make sense what was happening. And they were just like, oh, something's wrong here. Something is way off script. This is not what's supposed to happen. They knew they were in charge.

42:05
But those people were behaving as though they weren't. And it must have been maybe 10 feet, three meters. Perhaps one line broke by a youngster, and they just backed off snarling. And at that point, the others saw that, and they all just backed off. And they were all snarling, but they must have gone about 20 feet back, like, this is wrong. And the three guys, cool as a cucumber, pulls out his machete, bends down, whips off a leg. A lot, lot. Throws it over his shoulder.

42:34
They turn, laughing, and just start walking off calmly. At that point, I'm then following them. So, they've got them there, me here, and then the lions watching as someone's just nicked their lunch. And just, it was the longest, it about 100 feet, I think, back to the vehicles. It was the longest distance ever, just the back of your hair, everywhere. like, waiting for these claws to...  But obviously we made it back. And we ate that meat that night.

43:04
And it was, oh I've not enjoyed a meal more. And just the respect that I had a man from me, was like, we go buy some meat from the supermarket or something. We have no idea what the animals like or what's gone into it. We just hand over some money and we get that. These guys literally risked their life to get that meat for themselves in the village. I was such respectful. And.

43:31
It was later thinking about it talking with you about how that translates perhaps into the world. That calm, super calm belief and not doing anything out of the ordinary but just calm confidence in yourself. How far that'll take you. Well, you would happen to love as well with the stories you were saying about like when they came to you and it's like, you the guy that wants to record in the South of France? Yes.

43:59
So yeah, attitude is like, have a friend of mine that is like, life is actually has this attitude. It's like life is a hundred percent attitude. that's what we like the self confidence that you protect. wearing Ibiza and even to get into clubs, it's like if you go with attitude, it's also a big jungle. They are very different types of jungle. And what do you think with regards to, cause my son is,

44:28
He's 17, about to go out into the world. And for me, I know the wild bits are not great, the social bits or the business world. A calm confidence, not ego, but a self-belief in the ability to look people in the eye and walk up to them, be their hunter, be their farmer, be their CEO, I don't know, whoever. And to be able to be open, but confident. Do you feel that is perhaps even more important than your qualifications?

44:58
school and university or? I think education became a luxury. So, it's like, if you see a lot, you get the credit and actually, I was speaking with senior uh and you were telling me about the amounts to travel. I think a combination of both can be important. I do believe, I think education is completely...

45:28
It's very outdated, the way we educate. Still, there's some value to it. Proba. not in the exact format, format, bute things to be learned. What I don't believe is when you only have those qualifications and you don't have anything else. Now when you go out, I think that if you have attitude, if you have self-confidence, if you believe in yourself.

45:58
If we have to balance between one and the other, I will say that's probably even stronger. And the other is the ability to take risks. A lot of people spend their lives, and I see with a lot of people. With so many people, it's like...

46:14
I want to do this when the moment is right. The moment will never be right. It's like when's the right moment for you to approach the light. Never. It's like you’ll never be ready. You take the risk and then when you go and you have the attitude because the attitude I think is because often people are like oh, you're bluffing. Yes, but by bluffing.

46:41
you're also tricking yourself into believing you can do it and you're pushing yourself further. So, I think it works both ways. So, I do believe those skills, if we have to compare them and weight one against the other, I think these are fundamental and even more important. What I like about education, and education doesn't have to be like the typical formal education, but it's like...

47:10
I prefer not to pay for my mistakes. So, if I can speak with you and learn from you, that means I won't make my mistake. But it saves me a lot of time. So, you can get that through mentors, through reading, through YouTube videos, through live experience. And we're actually speaking with Finn as well about extreme sports. On extreme sports, after having...

47:38
after having broken I don't know how many bones in my body, when I go into something new, get the good teacher at the beginning, train me well, and don't train me like, oh, just when things go right. It's like, what happens when things go right? Because maybe there's- for good equipment. Pay for good equipment, pay for good education, and prepare for that 1 % of times, I think.

48:06
So that's where think education pays off and saves you a lot of time and money. You can actually like catalyse your learning. I think one thing I've seen recently is that maybe that confidence gets you into meters. It gets doors open. It gives you the opportunities. But at that point, you need to have the goods to back yourself up. So, it'll give you more chances.

48:33
It's no good point having a chance if you don't have the goods to back it up. Some people say that luck is when opportunity meets preparation. That's it, yeah. So, I think it makes a lot of sense. And I think from there, like another thing that you were telling me about, is actually prepare for when things go wrong. Like you telling me you were working with Prince William as well? and I think that was redundancy, isn't it? And I think...

49:01
I worked last year with Prince William, and it was called the Earth Shop Prize, and we had seven or eight times working with him and because of his schedule we had a very limited time. Because the whole royal family is very much into conservation. Yeah, I worked with William a bit now and I find him to be deeply impressive and a very gentle, kind man. Yeah, extraordinary. uh

49:28
we would have a very limited time. I and Ben, my assistant, we prepared and prepared and prepared. And we'd prioritise what was going to happen. So yes, we would say we'd have 40 minutes. We were told we'd have 40 minutes. Invariably, they would turn up and be like, you got 24 minutes. You got eight minutes. Okay. But we had triaged so we could cut out those things because we knew we could still walk away with a complete package no matter what was cut out.

49:56
and we'd prioritise those things. And we had had three levels of redundancy. We had our main cameras, and there was one occasion, it was the first time, in London. Two of our redundancies failed, and we were able to move. Just a look, was like, like, okay, move to the next system. We had to move to the third system. And we had our time shortened. But because we'd prepared it all before, and we knew if something went wrong, we prepared for that one percent.

50:25
then you're good to go and you can still, when the moment happens, you’re prepared for it. And I think there were a couple of things I would love to connect with the business world because you were also, like, you were speaking, talking about priorities. if you get what, it's the 80-20 on Pareto's law.

50:50
20 % of your work brings 80 % of the results. And you had this situation with the helicopter as well. Can you tell us about that? Yeah, so I was down in Antarctica, and we did a number of things. But one of the ones I was most excited about was to go to top of Mount Erebus. Mount Erebus is the highest mountain volcano in Antarctica on the continent. And it's fairly active.

51:18
and you fly there by helicopter. But you're up there in 15, 20 minutes, but you're from sea level. And because of the effective pressure, which I don't fully understand, you're at about just over 5,000 meters. So that's proper altitude. So, you're going from zero to 5,000 meters in 20 minutes. You basically can't. Usually, you have to do what? So normally you're climatized. but 1,000 meters a day are not even for that. Yeah. But there you're going straight up.

51:47
to one of the most dangerous places on the planet with the winds. So, we were supposed to have three days filming. Because at the top of the mountain, you have all the snow, but the hot air that escapes create these fumaroles, these extraordinary ice caves that are constantly shifting and morphing these beautiful sinuous shapes. Then they become these chimneys that emerge from ice, and then the hot air escapes. So, we got up there by heli.

52:15
And the guy said he's going to stay there, pilot, make sure everything's cool.

52:21
We didn't get days. We got down to one day because of the weather window. We got up there like, you know what, you down the whole day. You got like four hours. Okay. So, we are mountain guide led us through the snow. We’re like instantly having to carry all our kit.

52:35
through the snow, this extraordinary landscape. You're on top of this thing looking out over to the open sea. It's frozen sea here. You can't west Scott and Shackleton's huts were. And the open sea, and beyond that, the orcas are waiting for this to come in. And it was blue. It was amazing. But it was minus 30 or so. As we worked our way, we go past a deformed helicopter that had been blown off the mountain. Just to give an idea.

53:05
to people because people are like altitude and they have no idea if they haven't been at like 5,000 meters it's like third of your air. Yeah, every step it's painful and even your brain is not thinking right. you don't have the clarity. so yeah, third of your air that you would normally have.

53:23
So we worked we found this one fume around guys that this is the one so he broke in with his ice axe after seeing already an helicopter Yeah, you won't that yeah, and it's a lethal place up there and We'll put this rope in you then rappel down inside this fume roll into these ice caves from minus 30 to about plus 30 Instantly because of the hot air that's coming up from the volcano

53:48
So, you're stripping down and the rate guide is there, like, okay guys, we've got your four hours. I'm staying in contact with the pilot. We start to prepare. This is myself and Ollie, he was working with me. It's so beautiful in there. It's like this cathedral of ice and silence with the colour coming through the ice. It's beautiful. And ice crystals. But the moment we arrived; the ice crystals start melting. So, we were working and then the guy's like, it's two hours. Check, 15 % you got one hour.

54:18
And we're like, okay, scrub that, scrub that, scrub that. And we're starting to triage again. Prioritise what we had to get to walk out with the sequence, because we're not going be able to come back here. The amount of people who get to go into an ice cave on top of Mount Erebus in Antarctica, it’s tight. No one had stood where we stood.

54:38
And then it was, we leave now.

54:43
You trust your local fixer, your local guide. If they say move now, you move now. You don't question it. Ever. Okay, we've packed our kit. But we've prioritised, so we were able to walk away with a sequence after an hour and 20 minutes, but at the start we'd been told three days. Because we'd done that. We threw our kit in the bags, kit back on, climbed out, we emerged into this howling wind. It was minus...

55:13
With Windchill, I have no idea, 50 to 60 minus, I don't know. There's that film Sahara, where you have that huge wall of sand that comes in. We looked and there was this weather system coming in from the sea. You see this thing moving in. If that hit us, the weather can come in for two or three weeks. We would not have made it. If that hit us, we would not have made it. We backed past the broken helicopter into our helicopter. We threw our stuff in.

55:42
Australian place like okay let's go pushes the button big red button it's like yeah good yeah good oh that's not right  helicopter broken he pulls up the water talk he's like okay base camp base camp we have emergency critical one we need evac now  he's like okay guys here we're emergency 24 hour bar it's like okay guys out

56:11
lying in the snow with his bag. The wind's blowing really strong and we don't want to be blown off like the other helicopter. So, doors open, you're coming out to this big howling thing, you're lying in the snow with his bag. And at that point, because it's so clear, so there's a wall coming in like this, or weather, and you can just see down to the base, these two tiny helicopters taking off down there, they're cleaning up at full speed. And they're coming in from the front of this front and they land.

56:37
We dive in, doors closed. We literally peel off and drop in front of this weather system. It wasn’t that close. And it was the pilots had their redundancy. That safety was ready. Those helicopters were waiting in case. We had our redundancy with the filmmaking. The guide was checking constantly. But everyone there was an expert in what they were doing and had multiple levels of redundancy.

57:02
which nature can just switch like that. it's having things in place, ready and being able to adapt instantly. Don't be stuck to your plan. I'll always storyboard. I'll always think about what I'm going to film on planet meticulously. The perfect images, the perfect scenes.

57:18
It won't ever be that, but you're starting from a place of this will be perfect. Tell us about Storyboard, because it can a little bit compared to even strategy on the complex. I think from talking to you, does seem as though it's the case. You start from an ideal. What would be the ideal scene? How would be each shot would be perfect? In a documentary, it will never be that. But by starting with a perfect image, that's what you're striving for.

57:45
And also, when you go into that situation and it changes, and things can move quite fast, there'll be a key point. say for instance you're with a bear, and you have an elephant that has an abscess, and you need to it, and the elephant's going down. You draw it, the key moment you need to get is that dart hitting the elephant.

58:07
and their fronts on the ground, they're working on it, because you've drawn exactly how it is. When you're in that moment, and there are rangers around, there are other elephants about, I've done it with gorillas, and they're trying to come in and attack when you're trying to save.

58:20
Because as I know before, you drew that, you know exactly where you need to be at that moment to get that key thing. And if it suddenly is pulled out and you can't carry on, you've got those key shots again. You prioritised it; you've drawn it, you've imagined exactly how it should be. So, when you're in a high stress situation, you're able to go into getting the shot you need to tell that story. And I think putting that planning in place...

58:43
with starting with your ideal and then having those levels of redundancy and triage of situations in case they change, it does strike me that what you were talking about is similar to the business. No, it makes all the sense like also like you have to...

59:01
life happens and you have to adapt and everything, but you have to know what's the goal, where you go and also because you have to understand the difference between managing priorities and managing urgencies. And often we focus on urgencies, and we forget about the priorities and sometimes the urgencies are things we can scrabble off of like this thing that happened to you in the cave. And I think another one there that strikes me is this last year, the secrets of the elephants.

59:31
And we had limited time, budget, and we were there. And it was a day, and we went into it, and I was going to tell a really important story about this family of elephants in this riverbed. But we got a radio call that way up north, three days drive up north, there's a dry riverbed where no elephants had been seen for years. There was a bull elephant walking through it. And it seemed to be a reliable source. I had to make the call.

59:57
Do we stay here or has that now become the story? And you have to be prepared to let go of your certainty against risk, but the risk of that has now become the priority. And we took that risk and it's extraordinary, this lone bull walking for days down this riverbed, and no elephant had been seen for years. Bull is a male elephant. Male elephant, yeah. And this bull elephant, this whole story.

01:00:25
that goes with him and he walks all the way to the sea and there's this shot of this elephant in front of the sea which you just don't get and it became an absolutely integral part of the film and I think we can get, yes draw a storyboard, be prepared to throw it away. You always have to get the bigger picture, you always have to be able to keep stepping back in a situation and go we leave this now, that has become the story. That has become, in business I'm sure you can...

01:00:52
point similarity. Especially when you go with startups and everything, often you have to be there. Because what you learn, and right now I'm working with a company called Katrina about the funeral business and that, which is like a market.

01:01:11
Nobody wants to talk about it. Even we call life insurance when it's about death. And nobody wants to talk about it. And it's a completely like antiquated, old-fashioned industry that has so much impact on people's lives that everybody’s not wanting to talk about it. And once we got in, we started realizing that a lot of our beliefs were not that.

01:01:40
So, we've been on it actually from lunch with the company to now. We had to adapt the thing. We had the storyboard, but then it was like, we got there and the elephants were not where we thought they were. So, it's like, okay, where are they? And you have to change it. You don't know what's going on as well. that's capacity to adapt quickly. And something that can seem a challenge.

01:02:09
or can seem as though it's just destroyed what we're trying to do and end up being obscenely powerful and positive. positive. I was waiting for my time to shoot to get the rains arriving from the desert to these elephants recently. And was just going to be some water coming down and the elephants eating it. Turns out it was the worst storms in 150 years. And we had to flee to escape the flood for our lives. We had to get out of the river then.

01:02:36
And I remember cursing him, oh no, it's gonna be so beautiful. We then filmed that, that is then the story. And it destroyed my concept, my storyboard of that scene. But by embracing it, it became the most important perhaps strand within the film. And so, what can seem, so it's destroyed, from another angle can seem of complete benefit.

01:03:05
I really actually tell people that they should listen to your podcast, which is Thrizzle Wildlife. By Toby Strong on Spotify. I've been listening to it the last few days and the description you made. I think you have like a bull next to you as well, right? Waiting for the water to come and then you had to drive through your life. But the level of detail and we're going to talk a little bit about that.

01:03:34
level of detail you describe it. I was actually driving last night back home and I was there. It's an amazing story, not only the amazing story, but how you describe it. would really recommend people to check your podcast. I've loved several episodes, but that one in particular I found it fantastic. we have, we had, there's something.

01:04:05
that I really, I’ve always questioned myself. And here I think we have two questions. I remember this Vietnam picture of this child coming and I think they were running away from the bomb and the child was burned.

01:04:29
there were a lot of questions about later and I think even actually the photographer I believe, I'm not sure, he committed suicide I would say, really. And there are two things. There's a big separation between...

01:04:49
you and the subject through the lenses. So, I think this brings us to two things. One thing is how do you protect yourself? Because I think you have great stories like that you're so focused that you actually there's a lioness coming on the back or the snake crawling over you something like that and then

01:05:17
There's another thing is, what is it right to intervene? Because in this case, people are like, you have a camera, you're seeing a child burn. Okay, you won an award, but why didn't you drop the camera and help the child? But also, if you drop the camera and help the child, the world won't know about that. It's not...

01:05:41
It's like, what's the role? It's not a binary black and white. I think, and when I work with younger people coming in, or we're going into difficult situations, it's really important that everyone has their own agency. And everyone will have their limits, and everyone will have their own perceptions.

01:06:05
I always try and say, if we're going into this situation, if you believe, particularly people, and you can go and work with a tribe, and yeah, they're gonna say, of course you're permissioned, because they don't know any different really. And it's up to you. If you walk in and you go, you know what, yes, you've said OKAY, but you don't know how this will be used. You don't know in what context. then put your hand up and go, not happy. And then we stop and we talk about it.

01:06:34
because you can just bulldoze your way through. can go, yeah, but we have to get this because it's for this commissioner, it's cost this many million, and this, this, this. like, who cares? This is people's lives. And I think it is really difficult. And you can,  it's very easy, and there so many experiments on it, psychology, that you can be taken down a route  and find yourself doing something that, everyone else says you have to do it, you can find yourself in a very dangerous place  that you yourself wouldn't do. So, I think...

01:07:04
Everyone needs to be given agency to put their hand up and we just stop and check. These are ethics of companies that are actually one of the biggest challenges we have nowadays in corporations. and you're sent out there to cover something. If you don't film it, you're held responsible for that. You'd say, well, I'm not sure they knew exactly what it was. There are ramifications for that. With regards to the natural world,

01:07:31
Again, it's up to the individual. If nature is happening in front of you, I tend to let it unfold. But if in any way humans have been involved, I've been in situation where cheetahs are extremely rare. And there were these cheetah cubs, and the mom went off to feed, and a troop of baboons were coming towards them. And there was a load of land robes around, gaining vehicles, making a lot of noise. And the youngsters were calling, and the mom couldn't hear.

01:08:01
and these baboons would come and rip those cheetah cubs apart. Humans were involved in that, and I stepped in and chased the baboons away with the vehicle. Was that right or wrong? I don't know. But for me, humans are involved, therefore I've got a right to be involved. I've been a number of times, I've worked, yeah, I it recently, elephants. And if elephants have fallen in, I've witnessed elephants die in the wild and it's awful.

01:08:31
But if there's a situation where they’ve fallen into a well or something man-made, yeah, I’ll get them out if we can. It's really difficult. It's really difficult to know. How do you feel about it? Like, you actually have the gilly and the emotional...

01:08:53
it's something that you come after and it's like, I’ve witted that. Oh, I don't know. I've had baby elephants die on my lap. I've cried a lot while I film. I'm very emotional and I cannot separate. You're talking about oh a separate subject.

01:09:16
Glass gives you a sort of distance and you're going be lost in that and that's why one of the we've talked about when you go into business is who's got your back. If you're lost in the moment, who is the person who's scanning around and just pulls you out of the way? My friend Nick a number of times has saved my life. It's like, we go now. And then again, you listen, you move in suddenly. I remember I was with Bushman.

01:09:42
We were in this little scrape under a bush by a waterhole waiting for kudu to come in and they were going to hunt. We waited two weeks and they said, ah.

01:09:52
a leopard, distant leopard, that's amazing. I got the lens, I filming this leopard coming towards, wow, this is brilliant, I'm looking over their shoulders. And then they just grabbed me like this, and I put the camera down, the leopard was there, like two meters away, and they stuck an axe in my hair. I didn't know, we had no language. They just grabbed me and pulled me, and we had to jump out and run with that leopard, because otherwise it was gonna jump in and we'd have been gone. I was lost in that world of the image.

01:10:23
So, there is a separation.

01:10:26
So, I've just argued against myself. um I’ve solved whilst filming. one of our lessons there is who's got your back in those situations? And another thing we’ve been talking about, a lot of issues, think, most of mankind's issues are issues with communication.

01:10:55
and we're sharing experiences also like uh... telling a little bit about what I do with horses as well we were talking at dinner about how you go and I think there are so many beautiful analogies in terms of communication and we tried to phrase a couple of them that I’ve seen and would love to take

01:11:24
you don't believe in hiding you believe in like going to...  you were telling me about the arctic fox you were telling me about bears you were telling me about wolves you were telling me about lions you were telling me about all these animals and what you say is you kind of kept on the same energy level at home right? so you empathize with them and you could come almost invisible and

01:11:50
because we are used to see people hiding. But you're in some crazy situations where it’s like the animal standing next to you, like you're telling you the lions, can actually come and eat you. I can hear a lot of my contemporaries, if they listen to this, going, oh, no. This is only my thoughts and how I think. um

01:12:19
Animals aren't stupid. And often they'll look and they'll see a little tent. Let's put it this way, people, if you see a lion, do not try and match their energy. They look for professionals. Yeah, if they see a little tent, they know there's something funny going on. Except what's going on? I had a lovely experience sub-arctic with those arctic fox magical creatures. And I must have been 200 meters away and they saw me and froze. I just talked to them.

01:12:49
going meet him, I'm put my tripod up, I'm going to film you for a bit. When you're happy, we'll move a bit closer. And I've no pressure on me, so I just did this over the period of a must-be manpower to. Like, we opened it up, sat here with the Arctic Fox where you are. It was very, very special to me. And with what you don't want, there's an ego involved. When you want...

01:13:20
though it’s presence on you and you feel so special and unique. But that doesn't serve that animal. Because if it knows, oh I can come to people, the next time it may be a kid, it may be somebody who panics, the animal will get shot or it will not serve that animal well. So, you want to be invisible. You don't want to be seen as a positive and you don't want to be seen as a negative. So, you want to become invisible to it. If you've got a...

01:13:48
one antelope gr. ng, there'll be other types of antelopes but it doesn't really see that because it's not affecting them positively or negatively they just move through their world and that's what you want when you're with animals is to be a neutral presence you want to be a neutral presence so that you can operate around it so it carries on doing what it does in the world and I found that as well filming people you know I filmed a burning man

01:14:13
If I stand there like that in Burning Man, still, you're stand out like a sore thumb and everyone's just going to stare at you. So, you need to move. You move in the rhythm everyone else is moving and you vanish. I did that at Taipei Sun, the largest gathering of annual people on Earth in Kuala Lumpur. Extraordinary spinning and moving people. for five hours, I danced and moved with them, and you become invisible and it allows you the access.

01:14:39
Similarly, I filmed in temples in Nepal, up in the Tibet water. You start dancing and swinging around there, you're going to stand out again like a sore thumb. There you need to be still and to still your energy. You match your energy to your subject because in fight, and I think we talked on this with business, if you're operating from a fight or flight mode, which becomes the...

01:15:05
or energy you're afraid of. And it overrides everything else. Only when you can set that aside, are you able to communicate and be open. And that's when the magical transformation of communication can happen. So, by matching your energy to a person, they feel safe and they're not afraid or they're not too excited and you're able to communicate properly. And that's been...

01:15:29
Over many years I’ve observed myself around animals and people in Egypt. It's a very special thing to be able to do when animals and people trust you. People try to personally, I think we watch too much like all these movies  about... oh

01:15:48
the horse is my spirit animal and they want to come there and it's like the horse really cares about my feelings like the horse will help you with your feelings it doesn't care if you broke up with your partner it's like it's irrelevant for the horse it's just being the horse and by being the horse it helps you so take that instead of thinking that the horse is

01:16:18
going to be like listening to your trauma like the horse will do what the horse has to do and if you're at that level and you're seeing like

01:16:31
We are all beings and because it's something even a little bit arrogant It's like you should be like me and you should give it to me. No, you are even with people It's like you have your personality. I have mine and we can live like that and balance each other, and I think often we don’t Become like neutral or invisible. You're trying to bring people into our frequency Yeah, and you in your work for forces does that resonate with you? Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. I think.

01:17:01
a couple of things like I'm not totally self-taught but I'm a lot self-taught I bring my experience and it's funny because the person that taught me that I have a lot of like love and respect for but often she was like you're doing things wrong you're being disrespectful and I was like okay let's talk about it why is this wrong

01:17:30
Why is this disrespectful? And then she would be like, okay, maybe you're right. I would have never tried it. And then a month later I see her and I go to a session with her and she's doing it. was like, wasn't I being wrong and disrespectful? It's like, yeah, I actually thought about it better and it actually makes sense. So, this kind of evolution where you bring the formal knowledge,

01:18:00
Flying back to what we spoke at the beginning, like what I've learned, what I've learned through my experience in life, being in every aspect, bringing, know, trying it. And I really, for me, it's like, I don't care about the horse's name, I don't care about the horse's personality, I care about safety.

01:18:23
especially for the people. First for the horses because they have no option to be inside. Then for the people that I'm working with and then for myself. But besides that, I try to flow and try to the process of the horse. Because my expectations are like talking to you about whatever trauma you have and I'm like trying, oh the horse should do this. It's like, the horse should do whatever he wants.

01:18:53
not have to be to decide because if not it's my expectations and that works to me absolutely oh anything there now are their shots you didn't take because of the larger perspective in the sense I should this would be such an amazing shot but in the big picture I'll probably get killed ah

01:19:18
Yeah, initially when you say things I've thought of have been with indigenous people. I like that the camera is down because it hasn't felt right. There's not one situation where I've regretted I'm able to go ahead and go, yep, I'm happy with that call. But with regards to, yeah, I mean, I think the one you're alluding to is when I spent five months in North America with bears.

01:19:45
they were sort of semi habituated; they love pecan nuts. In the morning, they have a collar, so you can find them, them a handful of pecan nuts, and it's kind of the deal, it's okay, you can follow me. But they're not that bright, and they'll just sort of wander off around a tree and come back, who are you? Dude, I've just been walking for four hours, you have some pecan nuts, like okay. And then they'll go on, and I remember early days when...

01:20:12
get to the middle of the day and the bear would just fall down and have a sleep in the moss under a tree. And you're like completely tense, kind like, what do I do? Oh, I should throw it. And then after a couple of weeks, you're yeah, I'll sleep as well. You're sleeping here and there's a bear sleeping there. And then they wake up and you carry on. And then it's a little nibbling along. And I was doing this one back with Lily. She was big, like on all fours, she was probably like, there. I think not more. And you're walking with this bear through this forest, which is pretty awesome. And then...

01:20:42
We're middle of nowhere and then she starts to be a little bit agitated looking around. I hadn't seen her like that. What's going on? Then suddenly, suddenly she looks up and there's a wolf sat there. It's like, where did that come from? And then look around and there's like, I don't know how many, eight to 12 other wolves just melted out of the forest, and they were just sort of stood.

01:21:12
And at that moment, there's huge screaming voice in me said, put the camera down. This is not the time to film. Yes. It's a situation I don't know anyone else who has had that. It's a run that I so love. Next to a bear. No one else has seen it. It would be unique footage with everything in me said, put the camera down. And I did. And I was utterly present. And I looked at the bear, and I looked at each of the wolves.

01:21:41
completely present in that moment. That felt like, as I say, of needs. Like, this is number one. You just, to get out of this, everything’s said to do that. And I did that. I don't know how long it went on. It could have been one minute. It could have been 10, 15, I don't know. And then they just melted away. There it went. And just carried on walking.

01:22:06
Should you look animal in the eyes or not? people usually tell you. And in the lions, they looked in your eyes and now you also looked the world. It depends on the animal. Generally, yeah, you do. I was with the gorillas for six months in Rwanda, Uganda. And there was one time I was with the researcher. We were walking on our own down this little gully. And suddenly, the sub male, he was huge.

01:22:36
came and he was here like this. So, I did this. I did this with the Dian Fossey looking down and the research didn't work out. I was able to look up, normally the grids you do not, and I looked up and I his head here. I looked into his eyes for a long time. There's this extraordinary wisdom.

01:23:00
wit, was this humour in there and it was so beautiful. So, there's some animals, no you don't. And their other times with the gorillas when they were smashing through and you would just never look them in the eye, that's just dangerous. Generally, you do. Cats, you don't turn your back on a situation in Brazil with a, again, semi tame but not jaguar. And I was working for a cameraman, I was very early on and he'd tell me, can you get me a battery? And I ran to get a battery, literally I remember.

01:23:30
running like you don't run from cats and then these huge paws on the back of my head and just onto the ground  just jack your head here and it just looks my face it's like don't  run from cats um each animal is different with the lions with a situation of the lion you  do not turn your back.  Bears if you're walking and

01:23:54
A bear walks into your territory. It has happened to me actually. It happened to me in Peru, on the Inca Trail. It was like a cult. So, if a bear walks into your territory, you stand up, you shout and scream and you defend your territory. But if you walk into a bear’s, you are submissive and you back off quietly.

01:24:19
There's a lot of things to learn about different animals. And again, learn that from the guys on the ground. Local knowledge, I guess, would be our business switch. And another thing that we're speaking about is regarding storytelling. And from there, would love to go into other aspects of it. You're a storyteller, like you describe yourself.

01:24:49
the video camera and another thing is how you relate and how you look at people. uh

01:25:00
see a praying mantis from above, it’s small. If I see a praying mantis from below, it's incredible. So, we should link people eye to eye. Because even if you're looking at someone and you think they're being humble but looking from below, that person is looking down on us. And it happens so much in real life.

01:25:21
and I think it goes back a little bit to what you're saying off standing around and confident and looking people in the eye. was really early on, was the first job, was like the fellow, Danish guy who offered me the job in France, was one of the first things I ever filmed, it the praying mantis and we said we don't, we do it all the time with our phones, we walk around we see a cute kitten or a dog or a

01:25:49
We just point our phones down and take a photo of it. Don't do that. Get on the level of it. And for me, the world, the praying mantis is an extraordinary predator. So powerful, so strong. You get below it. And we developed camera systems to allow us to do that. Figure out a way to do it. He's only that big. You get below and you look up. You see this monster of a predator. You know, but a lot more powerful than something like a cheetah or a lion.

01:26:18
And that's how you show that. And yeah, as we were saying, if you think of that in a personal sense, if you look down on someone, they'll have to look up to you. But this is personal, and that's how we should be communicating. And what we're saying just now as well is like, yeah, if you look up at someone, it means by definition, they're gonna look down on you. Who does that serve in communication? Yeah.

01:26:46
No, I completely agree with you. Now, I would love to go into another area, which is mental health. You've actually spoken very openly about it, and I find that the way you speak about it is very beautiful, but also very important. I'd like to go... So, yesterday I was...

01:27:16
Coming home, like I mentioned, and I was listening to your story about the elements. And I was blown away by it. And I was like; I want to be there. But if I'm there, I'm not going to see all this. The way I see the world.

01:27:46
is different. So, Patrick Susskind has this book called The Perfume and what I found fascinating about it is because usually he describes the world in terms of colours or vision, he describes it in terms of smells. I describe it in terms of ten of actions. I think sometimes I'm a little bit like the T-Rex, it's like, can only see movement.

01:28:16
You can, you look at the situation, and you get all the details. And you see all this beauty, and I've seen you or I've heard you doing that.

01:28:32
in that situation or going through trash in Nairobi or looking at the beauty around your home in Devon and describing every little thing during the pandemic. was like, how do I walk and don't see these things? So, there's this genius to you that is very awarded and recognized. You work with

01:29:03
some of the most relevant people in the movie industry. You have doctors, have amies, you have... But with these geniuses comes a certain darkness. And through history we've seen this on many people. And I know you're aware how lucky you are in your life. But you deal with it.

01:29:31
Can you tell us a little bit about this? Because I think it's really relevant what you mentioned. People are like, oh, if you're miserable, you have a terrible life, you have the right to be depressed. And this is not the right. This is a curse. But bring some other beauty to it as well. Hard to talk about. First thing, I would definitely argue.

01:30:00
the word genius. I’m led that for me to decide. So cool. Yeah, I suffered from the loans my whole life. As to what it is, don’t know. Different experts have said different things. Most labels I've had stuck on. uh I have...

01:30:24
area is great darkness. uh

01:30:31
has been a daily battle for my whole life. I have been blessed with the ability to see beauty and to capture beauty.

01:30:43
shadow back. been able to have very not many moments of joy.

01:30:53
And when I'm in these places, very few people get to go. And I look around and I see such happiness in all of those people with me. A sunrise over the Rajah Empire in Indonesia. The stars of the salt plains of Bolivia.

01:31:10
feel sad. It's a great weight to carry around and I'm happy to carry that weight but it's the burden it puts on those I love. It's terrible when I see it and it’s hard for people I work with.

01:31:31
really hard to work with me and I know it's really hard to live with me.

01:31:40
And yeah, I am able to capture wonderful things. And it comes at a really big price. And is there a link between creativity and shadow and darkness? I don't know. Again, I've pondered this and talked to this and read on this for many years.

01:32:08
And can you shine great light without dark shadow? And I don't know yet. uh

01:32:19
would I give it up? So that I could...

01:32:28
I'm light, and I'm looking fly light. Yeah, that's it.

01:32:37
removing that part.

01:32:41
be able to enjoy the beauty as well. How did you like that you were in Bolivia crying and sobbing over the beauty that you It overtook me that to stand in Salado de Uyuni is the biggest mirror on earth, hundreds of square miles of salt flat. And when the water is just right, you have perfect view.

01:33:07
be at night all the stars above you and you cannot see where it touches the horizon and it carries on beneath you and you stand there at the centre of all the stars just erupted out of me and just sobbing, I don't know if it was joy or release or something but

01:33:29
I've been places where that's very...

01:33:33
I don't wonder what the universe just overwears.

01:33:41
And... I'll keep going. Not wrong. Do you have any type of... Your work seems to be like very meditative and you're able to be like behind the camera. It's a good place for you to be. At times. I find that I'm unable to do a job, as in I'm able to clock in and clock out. I can't do that. So, the things I do...

01:34:11
heart of me. I'm not able to distance myself from him which isn't a good thing.

01:34:19
I am hugely affected from day to day. And that is very difficult. How do I cope? I don't cope well. So, I will see people wading through this detritus and cave and then try to

01:34:39
struggle to move from one place I go from the desert with people who have to travel 12 miles to get water. I then come back and I go somewhere else. One thing you've mentioned is, and you sent me a beautiful video about it, that if you allow me, I'd love to share it on my website, ah the beauty of the desert.

01:35:09
You mentioned a desert is for mystic and pre-indulgent. Yeah, I adore deserts. It's so repairing, no? Yeah, before it repairs it destroys. deserts, be they, they're not just hot, you have cold deserts and Antarctica is a desert, and the ocean as well, it's a cold, hot, desert. I find them the most magical of places. So, when you start to enter them, say it's a hot desert, first you leave building.

01:35:39
and cities and the walls go and then the trees go and then the bushes and then the grass grows. All of those things that hold us, that sort of keep us safe. And then there's nothing, it's just the sand or the ice or the water. The perspective goes. There's nothing to hold us, to hold our mind. And it starts to unravel.

01:36:05
I don't think it's a coincidence that all of the great monastic fates come out of deserts. I believe they're the birthplace of madmen and mystics. Your mind starts to run rather. And your demons come. Your first nights in the desert, you're visited by... I’ve had it. I love it. It's home. And you've got to let them come. They need to say their thing.

01:36:35
The deserts don't heal, the stuff comes and it comes in torrents. And only at that point, my dear friend Paul, incredibly wise man, simple philosophy like, would say, as young as you can, go to the desert, literally. Go to the desert and bury your shit. Some shit you're born with; some other people's give you, it's still yours, it. Go to the desert, dig a hole, bury it. Make peace with it.

01:37:05
back and get on with your life. And I find deserts extraordinary. They sort of mainline therapy. It's just heightened. uh

01:37:19
I've my experience has been like almost psychedelic right now. I had some of the deepest self-awareness and self-knowledge experiences in the past. Like it would be like the equivalent of an ayahuasca trip, and I joke that one of the experiences I love for someone like a life partner like a wife, a mother of kids, whatever.

01:37:50
that I would like for that person would experience is a survival course. Exactly through that, but also through the sense of becoming an animal and reconnecting with the animal nature. And the animal loses a lot of this mental madness, like you call it, and drops, has to shut all these things because it gets into survival mode. I find that it should be part of like...

01:38:15
education, the military actually, think one of the things that it was great as well was that deconstructing or pushing the limits. I didn't go to the army, but I think that definitely society has a role to it. Another thing I is so important that we do not have is coming of age for boys to men. I've looked at different cultures and read on this and there's a lot written on it.

01:38:45
every culture had a coming of age from boys to men. the similarities are extraordinary between them. You're taken from the village by men, not your father, taken, and you go through a series of ordeals. You're pushed and pushed and pushed through these different ordeals and challenges. They'll come at night in the world where you're on your own and you're visited by demons. They will come and it's the long night. From the next day,

01:39:15
there will be a rebirth. There will be you going through a tunnel, through an arch, through something signifying rebirth. But your reborn is a fact. And at that point, there is a celebration. And you're taken back to your village, your community, where you're then reintroduced to your parents as...

01:39:33
I see a lot in our world, a lot of lost men, a lot of young men, and lot of lost parents who struggle as their children become adults. And there isn't that.

01:39:50
You don't have a ceremony.

01:39:53
where your child becomes bad and there's a reforming of that relationship. And that ceremony, that coming of age, I think is so important and I promote the loss of it in our society and I think it would do you so much good. Especially now where the masculinity is taken as toxic. Yeah. And there are, know, but nobody says what's positive masculinity. So, we're having a lot of likes...

01:40:20
people that are totally lost, both men and women, because they don't have these roles and everybody's speaking on the negative, but where's the positive? Where do you have to go as a man? What should you aspire? And people are lost. It's about criticizing, it's about humanizing, and it's like, where to go? Yeah, don't tell me where not to go. It's like, tell me where to go. I actually had a funny story. I went with some friends to Ethiopia.

01:40:50
to do one of those rides which was jumping cows  in the Omo in the south of Ethiopia but we were riding there on the wrong way which was very bad  so we ended up like going with the donkeys and jumping donkeys and doing a lot of crazy stuff  it was our ride we actually went  to Ethiopia to do the ride of faster jump jumping cows uh

01:41:16
Let's go a little bit, we’ve been a uh lot in big subjects, let's go a little bit. uh What have you learned from all these people? Let's go a little bit on celebrities, everybody loves celebrities. Sir David Attenborough, that I've heard you speaking very highly of Yeah, there is no one like him. In which occasions have you worked with him? I've worked with him abroad. uh

01:41:45
and in the UK. And now he's 97, so worked with him very recently. He's not traveling much at all, so working with him, doing interviews in England. But still at 97, he is the most extraordinary figure. uh

01:42:09
There is everyone talks of who will replace him. There is no way. It is the end of an era. To be in his company, spend time with that man is blessed indeed. Whatever you learn from him, what you admire.

01:42:30
Yes, hopefully.

01:42:35
If he doesn't like something, will speak it, he will not do it. And we've been in situation, remember when I was on top of a building in London filming the closing piece for Planet Earth 2, there was a helicopter circling and it's like Sir David is what we're saying, and then this isn't right, I want to say this. Okay, but we've, you know, and everyone's prepped for this for months before, but we're going to have to get to this place.

01:43:05
And he knows what this is costing him. There's a helicopter there. There are all these things. There's this pressure. he's like, no, we'll do this. OK. He sticks to his guns. And if he doesn't agree with it.

01:43:18
And he's not that right. And I find through my life I will do what seems best for everyone and to chameleon into other people's energies to try and find a path of least resistance. I was bullied a lot at school, and I hate conflict and so to avoid it I'll try and weave my way through. But that's not always the best result at all.

01:43:48
someone like Sadeq will stand and he will say, no, that's wrong, I'm not doing that. And there's always respect for people who do that, who have strong boundaries. uh and personally, I see it as conflict. And to avoid conflict, I don't have boundaries, but only strong messages yourself. You have boundaries and I see the wisdom in that and strength in that.

01:44:13
Strong boundaries, commitment, and following passion for Sir David. He's done it for 70 years. He's still going at 97. We just recorded the commentary for this big ocean’s thing with him, which won't be finished until he's 100. That's it. Not easy. Well, that's kind of a story.

01:44:36
It's not celebrities, it's people on the ground. So, tell us some inspiring stories that were like... I told you we were in Caramba, the Rangers there.

01:44:53
They protected the elephants. They were the only defence for the women and children against the Lord's Resistance Army. We spent a couple of weeks with them. Amazing men.

01:45:11
I'm in the LREK, Police State, Newport, and pretty much every one of them is killed.

01:45:20
The silent hero. Yeah, they're our guardians. Yes, we give some money to save dolphins or pandas. It's great. It's good. It's those people day in, day out, who give their lives to preserve our wildlife heritage.

01:45:40
We can, you know, I'm on a podcast, I get to go film, I shouldn't be here, it's those people. The presenters, there's Sir David, yeah, right. It's the people who give up their lives to stand up for an animal, to stand up for a patch of rainbows.

01:46:02
utter heroes and heroines who daily do that, daily lose their lives in the battle to protect their world and heritage.

01:46:14
One of the things I, when we're talking about like your vision for your future, one of the things that...

01:46:23
came across is that you're trying to shed a light and a focus.

01:46:31
people are not there or are forgotten sometimes. So, through your work also in your store and education and everything, how you're putting like a light on these people that people don't know about. Be it the fishermen that give you their last fish, be it like elders that have been forgotten by society.

01:47:01
It looks like an amazing way to do it. It's our responsibility, it? We are blessed, you and I, have some sun on our faces that allows us to have a voice on Instagram and Facebook. Wherever it is, we have a bit of a voice and it's up to us to use that voice to champion the cause of those who don't. Be that people.

01:47:30
be that patch of forest, be it a fish. We are the ones, if we don't have time left, we have no time, we need to get on with it. And it's up to us; it's our responsibility to use what light we have on us to shine it on those who don't.

01:47:52
How do you intend to do that from now on? I'm very happy. You actually have quite some plans. It's very modest of you, but considering it's not that I've just met you, we've been speaking for a few days now, we actually do have some plans about it that seem great, both on education, both on working with...

01:48:18
universities, people, corporations, were saying about like even the desert, that you were saying I would love to take people with mental health issues to the desert so that they can go through these processes and connecting and everything. you do have a lot of... What I can do is go with what my heart and passions feel, and I run it up to so little time. I'm sure you're the same and I don't have great business acumen. I don't...

01:48:48
I'm not great in company. I can do what I can do. So, I'm just doing that as much as I can until I meet people such as yourself and you go, oh, we can do that. Okay, great. I need help with the logistics, with the manifesting of these ideas into reality. I have such clarity of what can be achieved, but I need your help with it. I really do.

01:49:17
Because ideas are only ideas that are useless until they become reality. So, I need help with that. when we do, we can do a huge amount of I think this is a great way for us. I still have some final questions. And I do have three pages worth of questions, which we'll do a second episode. Or probably a third and fourth, because it probably might be a double episode. um

01:49:49
what would you ask people that are out in the support?

01:50:00
You know what, I'd like to not answer that. I'd like to talk to you about that. Because that's what I don't know. I would like to work with you to come up with structure and to turn that into...

01:50:15
physical action. I can paint beautiful worlds of what I would like to create and how we can do it. And these wonderful things and how much good it will do. But what I need help is to break that down into a reality of, if you do this, it will help you do it. So, I'd like not to answer that until we've talked it through. And then maybe you can do a follow-up and do a... And you do a follow-up and go...

01:50:43
Or you can do one where you go, okay, having talked this through with Tony, here's how you can help. Here's 12 things. So that’s our break for the next episode that we'll record and hopefully our project will come through. are talking about a lot of really cool stuff, ah including starting to try to take people on different experiences and teaching people how to be like animals and lead like animals.

01:51:13
I think that's great concept we are coming through. And it's us moving to a place of pretending to be like an animal. We are animals. We need to forget this separation. And for hundreds of thousands of years, our senses, how we communicate, how we react, is as an animal. We just need to remember it. We're just cloaked by this modern world of it. It's dull.

01:51:42
our senses. We just need to lift that mantle off and to re-engage with what we already know. Now, just a little bit of housekeeping to finish.

01:51:57
Last year you were doing a very successfully public speaking with National Geographic. You have a lot of company. Sometimes you're extreme, in my opinion, too modest about it. ah Where can people know more about you? You have a website, what's your website? SobeStrom.com. Okay, people like, if they're interested in getting you to public speaking, can contact you through there. Yeah, I'm going through that.

01:52:28
Because I'm visual, a lot goes on to Instagram, which is @tobystrong1. That's probably... Those two are the first places I would go. You can always find my contacts on there. Yeah, and eventually we'll start producing a little more. Toby, thank you so much. I'll you soon. was such a pleasure.

01:52:53
Not only in this interview, but these days have been amazing. Thank you Mini Vizza. And we are off to some sunsets. We hope you enjoyed, but we have to enjoy the rest of the day as well. Thank you for listening to this episode of LITS X Podcasts. We hope you enjoyed it. Please support us by giving us five stars and following us. You can continue the conversation on comments on our LinkedIn page under LITS Adventures.

01:53:24
See you next week.

01:53:34
The LITS X Podcast is only possible thanks to our amazing team. A special thanks to the team at Riverside and Jonathan Kissin.
