Episode 20:

00:11
So, Vinny, what was your last job title? My last job title was an Associate Creative Director in Apple, California. And worked over there taking over the iPhone team.

00:28
and just getting inspired by enhancing the power of photography of the iPhone and the shot on iPhone. And what was the award that you would say was most more prestigious that you've won? Well, I would explain two ways. My best award was my first DNAD. But my actual best award was to understand that the freedom I had to leave everything was priceless.

00:58
And what was your first job? How old were you? The first job ever in my life or in my creative industry? In your life? my entire life. Well, I worked in recycling systems from loading trucks to ripping off plastic labels and dividing into ecosystems, facilitating the separation of types of plastics in order to be recycled.

01:28
How old were you? I was 14,13.

01:33
Okay, let's go on this journey with you. Definitely. So, Vinny, you ended up at probably like a very aspirational job for a lot of people in the creative industries and not only at Apple. Can we go a little bit back to the beginning? Like where were you born, in which setting and how do you start? Because I think it's a fascinating story that it's very inspirational for many people.

02:03
Well, the thing is I woke up one day in a place where as much as I honoured so much, where I was born and family, but man, I knew from that day that I was meant to be someone else.

02:21
And I always followed my passion, no matter how many distractions I had, to be led by my intuition as a child. But I was born in a place where there were so many battles in between egos and violence and disruption of desires. So, I would call in a conventional way, the barrio, the ghetto. With much honour, I decided to leave home very early on in my life.

02:50
So, before I became a man and age of 13, I was out already from that place. and then you are out at 13. I'll just start working out you organize your life on you because a lot of our audience Hasn't been through such a path. So, it's like parents paid for education like more traditional paths like it happens often like what happened?

03:21
Every man must, has this calling of survival mode, you know and you enter the survival mode and what do you do for living? And obviously that's your reality versus your ambition, you your dreams. If your reality changes, circumstances don’t necessarily have to. So, I really had to do everything I could have imagined feeding myself. So, I started to do any kind of jobs like loading trucks, working,

03:57 
in construction and helping to clean department stores and obviously the other thing that makes you extremely it makes everything extremely challenging is the age you one wants to give a job so you you're also into that paradox of a man and child and then I knew I remember one night we were we were at your place and you were telling me your story that I was so fascinated by and you were telling me even the accent is like people didn't want to hire someone with my

04:27
That's a very common thing to really have is...

04:33
in terms of classicisms, you have a dialect, that you have influences from the streets in your dialogue and perhaps that can be an influence in trusting you, know, associating you with what actually is not right for your life and not right for society. But people forget that they should always listen to you in order to know where you want to go and by just honouring you, by listening to you and just giving you a chance.

05:03
So, in that case it happened to me. So, I was passing by some of the streets of this place in Brazil called Goiânia. It's not famous enough to be in a map and even to be remembered. So, I walked by and then I looked left and it was this place that was a printing store. was more like a place I used to print newspapers, magazines, etc. in Brazil called Grafica.

05:30
I walked in open chest and say I need a job, and I can clean up anything. can do whatever you guys can offer me, but I just want to start from a place. Not even able to finish my sentence. I got kicked out from this place and you know, always in my resilience mode. This guy just called me, hey man, what's your name? I'm Vinny. Okay, so how old are you? Doesn't matter man, I just want a job.

06:00
Okay, I saw that you asked for a job in the wrong place. So, if you really want a job, come to my place on Monday. And I said, what kind of place is it? It doesn't matter. You want a job, don't you? So yeah, okay, cool, I'll come. So, he gave me a ride home and then next day I was there half an hour before and this guy just gave me a broom.

06:22
and go on, man, you can start. Your shifts start from two to six and now you need to work in the night. I was like, what's that about? Yeah, we're gonna be a cleaner. Okay, you gotta start from somewhere. So, my first night, I started to whip up all the books, shelves, and everything. And I see a book with my surname on it. And this book basically obeys into the creative club of Sao Paulo.

06:52
And there's a special edition of this guy called Marcelo Seppa. He's one of the godfathers of Brazilian advertising in the modern days. And I had no clue who the fuck he was. And turns out this guy was one of the principles of my initial inspiration in my career. This guy was the man behind Havaiana's Volkswagen or the...

07:18
Fantastic dilemma of Brazilian advertising in golden days of 90s and early 2000s. Enough to inspire my life and make history in my beginning. So, I asked these guys, who's this guy? I'm like, this is the man you should know if you want to be in the game. All right, cool. And so that was it. I decided to really step forward in my life and understand that I really want to be in the world of design. But what is design? So, I decided to

07:48
arriving my job earlier and sit outside and just listen to these guys giving design classes. So, this place, just to remind here, the storyline is during the day was a design studio and in afternoon was a school of Adobe tools and 3D, technically a technical design school in a small-scale boutique. And I was outside waiting until the classes finished and having shifts.

08:18
I could clean the keyboards and wipe off the screens so the posh kids could come back and do their studies. They don't care much. Now dishonouring done. So, for me it was enough to just be outside and listening to lessons and really taking that seriously in my life. To the point everyone leaves the school and I could go on my own journey and use the computers without people knowing. So, in that point, I started to open the portals of opportunity of my life.

08:48
as I call the Adobe tools, illustrator, Photoshop, After Effects and etc. It's not knowing a glimpse of what I was doing. But understanding that was the first sprinkle of my beginning in my life, in my journey as creative. So, you start during the night that you were working there and there were the computers, you listened to the classes in the afternoon and during the night uh you start practicing like on what you've been listening to the classes. That is right.

09:17
And then what happens? Well, then obviously there's no comedy without tragedy. Tragedy without comedy. I would say I was not in a place to receive what they call luck. Such things I don't believe. And then I believe in a power of synchronicity, and I knew that I would be in trouble if I get caught by someone. So, I was so tired working twenty few hours a day and then I collapsed in the keyboard and I was.

09:47
sleeping at pass out even dribbling in latter tea  of temptation  and then I just get slapped on my back  from this arrogance  and also a postcard that reminds me I'm not in the right place doing the right thing  so this man just tell me off  in a swearing loud voice is  please just  pick your things if you have any and don't come back here you're fired

10:17
They thought you were like  on internet port side whatever like obviously  Just  For me was very difficult in that moment because  it was the only opportunity I had  to be out of the trouble and  Normality of the criminal environment I grew up  so  I got really frustrated and went home in tears and  You know really starting to question my life and everything  not to bring drunk

10:47
into this conversation but we're talking about transformation. So, and then I wiped off my tears and went back to the common work.

10:57
back to the system. And then I received a call from the guy that originally hired me and say, really apologize. My partner found you on a computer and really abusively fired you. And I was like, no, good. That was so unfair. I'm like, it's like, oh good, man. Come back here. I have something very serious to talk to you. I say, cool. In a second, I was there and arrived and I sit down. I gave this to you guys.

11:26
And I thought I would be in trouble, but I had nothing to hide. Clearly, clearly, I had. So, I had a folder in a server with all the stuff I've been creating in secret. These guys just like flip the computer and show me, listen, you've been using, creating all this. How? Have you ever studied design before or have you had the opportunity to do such thing? I was like, brother, where I come from, one thing we lack is opportunity. But one thing is no one can.

11:57
hide. No one can stop a man of dreaming because it's the only place you don't pay taxes for living. So, what do you guys want from me? I already feel like I've been punished enough. No, that's the point. From now on there's no punishment. So, you want to work with us?

12:13
because clearly, you're born for this. Okay, cool, what does that actually mean? like, you wanna be a designer? I said, yeah, I will, but I don't know what it is, so I can show you. And for me, it was basically the beginning of my, the avalanche of opportunities that I caused myself. And we're going to go on that avalanche because we still have quite some adventures ahead, but let’s just go here a little bit.

12:40
I've had the chance just to witness a little bit of oh your creative process with the NFTs at your place one evening we were there  and I was amazed  like the way you think  the speed that you create and the quality of your work I was just blown away like  I had never seen anything like that in my life.  Tell me something is it natural? Is it something you develop? How do you see creativity? How do you see like all this like because

13:11
What I've witnessed is very, very unique. And then when we go into friends' places or your place with all the furniture you create and that you’re remaking your home and I’ve seen you like build fires like no one, like there's a passion and intensity in everything you do, even like the fire, like it’s art. Like you're creating something and with a lot of depth, where does it come from? Do you think it's uh innate or?

13:41
You've learned it. Okay. I don't really think creativity It’s something that is a mysticism or it comes from a gift whatsoever. It's just a muscle really you articulate and work on it and it train and channel in there and to a point that becomes unreal the capabilities that you can.

14:09
unfold within yourself but ideas itself for instance in creativity it’s nothing without the power of producing taking the action and bring it to life with congruency so for instance the story that comes to a conclusion where I decided from that day!

14:29
Whatever I do, it will come from a place of intention. So, by being serviced with the power of design. So, from then, that now probably unfolds up to 16 years to 17. I realized that I still create in the same way. But obviously... What's your process like?

14:50
Well, my process is pretty simple, understanding the problem and not focus so much into the solution, but just making sure you're enjoying the process.

15:00
By doing that, you stimulate the daydream process in your mind. The daydream is when you train your mind to be full on working based into problem solving. So, I'm also a strategist myself. I always find the problem by solving with a solid strategy on thinking in different ways to solve that problem. But my creative side is how can.

15:30
make that entertainment  and then design comes  also  in exploration of being  honouring the aesthetic,  the craft and the craft also comes from offering  something very unique to call time you know  your timing is your offering to your work  so and then you know you realize that every single sprinkle you invest into a process  you will unconditionally return to you  in the art of crystallization of a process.

16:00
Let's go a little bit back to your story now. You have this place, they start giving you an opportunity and you start learning 3D design, you start learning all these things. Then you go into advertising, right? That was a very good question because that's actually what makes the dilemma of my journey between design and advertising. So that was a couple of months later in that job and it was August.

16:30
obsessed with 3D and post-production animation, whatever, would be able to challenge my brain in many creative ways I was in. And then there was this guy who came into the space to do a workshop and talk about art direction versus designer.

16:51
And I was like, what is the difference in between this? Could not answer that question. So, then this guy just started to say, designers are more the executioners of the process. They execute. And the art directors are more the prophets, the visual prophets. come up with the ideas and then they deliver that for you to execute. It's like, wow, that's so unfair, man. I want to be this guy. okay, what's the problem? My main question was, I was actually.

17:21
annoying kid in the room asking me question for this guy  and then he was like  say so the art director is the one that just  demand the work I want to be the boss  so  basically  I realized that from that day that's what I want to do but not focusing to the director side but being to the artistic one  so  but also I also loved how to execute

17:51
things in the most engaging way so I could not leave those tools behind. That became a new way of being, so it became an anomaly into the process. So, then I went to this guy and said, listen, I want to work as an art director. I know you can't because you need a degree in advertising. I like, Ma, I don't even have high school. How the fuck am going to get this job? Did you ever get a diploma, or you just did your career? No, I'm pretty good at myself. made them. Really beautiful.

18:20
Pretended that I had been to a school and sort of an organization that would control my mind thinking  and  Next day I picked up my  things in my lunch time and I went to this advertising agency where this guy  that was doing the talk where he works full-time  and then  Went to the reception and say I have a meeting with this guy  Told his name and then they say no, we don't have a meeting here.  Okay, how does how is it possible? Can you just bring him bring him downstairs? This is not how works.

18:50
Okay, so let’s make this easy. If you don't bring him, I'm gonna go upstairs. All right, so that’s the moment you bring the ghetto back into the occasion. So, then the guy came down, he's like, what are you doing here, no, I'm here to talk to your creative director, your boss. I want a job. He's like, no, man, you need to leave this place right now. At least show me around, you know, I want to get to know how an advertising agency works. And then I went upstairs and...

19:20
You know got to know the people and that’s it. I asked for a job for whatever Circumstances I could be there will be there so I started to cut the layouts after printing them and gluing them into the blackboards So they can be presented in the meetings. That was my job so two things that that I find really interesting because a lot of people they just go and oh I want a job. I'm just sending my resume something I really.

19:50
relate to you because several of the jobs I really wanted  the way I did it was like man I'm here  and I'm not leaving  and this is what I can do  and I just wanted to be on the right place and I was like if they're if the right  if I'm at the right place I'll get the right opportunity and that's a little bit what you did and  what you watch a lot of people's like  oh let me send my resume and maybe they  will pick me up and it's like  nobody does or you end up hiring people with great resumes

20:20
that in the end they are kind of useless in what they do and also like this stamina it's like I don't take no for an answer it's like and you go for it being and try to be at the right place and then when the opportunity comes you're there now Brazil at a certain point gets too small for you and you go into London and you don't speak English you don't have a visa you end up in a

20:50
of trouble but you also end up in top advertising agencies, top clients, and a lot of awards. Can you give us like a very brief summary of this period and how you get there? Because  okay now I'm like for a kid from the ghetto I'm like I'm pretty successful you're probably doing better  than most  of the people you grew up with and you got out of that life  but now  it's like no I want more it's like  Brazil is not enough.

21:20
Now I want to go worldwide.

21:23
Well, I'm going to put a comma into Brazil was too small for me actually. I was still working at a regional market with small agencies. And so, I never really resonate much with the Brazilian advertising culture actually. I'm not calling myself a black sheep in that sense. But I found that advertising very polished, very trendy and all led by pop culture.

21:53
Obviously, advertising has a huge element of that, but for me it was taken so seriously. And then I started to understand more about the business after a couple of few years in advertising in Brazil. And I started to see that way the rock stars are not coming from here. Okay, obviously, not just due to the fact that I was obsessed with Rolling Stones, to make that very easy decision to go to Europe and London. And when I looked at the pictures

22:23
The crats of the works that used to resonate to it, they come from a place called BBH in London, Bartholomew Haggerty. That was it. I was like, I’m in baby, how do I do to get to this place? That place would be the diploma, but I won't have any. But I must confess, I'm a doctor in taking risks. So, I tried to check how much money I had, and I realized that was not enough.

22:52
So that was a good starting point. And in sequence, know, my copywriter, my partner at that time, he a process that he's like, brother, I don't really think it's a good idea, man. You should first go to Sao Paulo, you know, make that, and get some awards and pack your bags and go maybe to other place, but I know it's going to be a really challenging one. Especially if you don't speak the language. 100%. So, what do I have here? Like, how are you?

23:22
Nice to meet you and thank you. Obviously, that makes you polite enough so and then I packed my bag with 500 euros, and I moved to Amsterdam for a month and I Just realized that what how am I doing here? It's okay. You still 18 years old in the second month of your birth. It's okay and you were 18 at the time Yeah, I 18 and I mean do the fact that you started working at the time.

23:52
You could have got the passport like and travel on your own like a few months earlier Exactly. I couldn't leave the country early as I could and I wished brother what I've actually did was I was in a land house back in the days talking to MSN with my community back in Brazil and I just hear very common language coming from the corner left side and I understood a few words, but I was like it's not Portuguese from Brazil

24:22
Okay, these guys looked at me like what you looking at man, you know, like Looking at right place and then I just look at what they actually doing and they were jail-breaking mobile phone Okay, what are you guys doing? Okay, but doesn't matter what you want away from one. I can't stand you that from Romania Okay, I'm from Brazil and turns out they really like each other and then it's like man. I can't help you to

25:05
So basically, you were jailbreaking stolen iPhones and then you were not working in Apple. Exactly and that's how I made my cash into the UK. So, I made couple of thousand years, and you know spent a night.

25:22
that worked with them. So, what I had to do is I had 500 euros  and I paid my hotel and I had a few hundred left  and to survive and then I paid a guy from the learn house for a night  so I could use  the space to  jailbreak the mobile phones and I did. I had a couple of boxes of shoes full of iPhones and I unlocked them all and got my cash and this guy's asking me to come to Paris to make a deal that and you know pickpockets and

25:51
stuff I’m not stealing people I'm just gonna help you in the geek side, so I decided to leave these guys behind and go to the UK how much you sleep or not.

26:03
When I’m in a good mood, it's four hours. oh, So I did so, moving to London, arrived in a place where if you don't speak clean of your retarder, which was my belief system, by the way. So, I felt like the world was too big for me. For the first time, I felt very fragile and insecure and small and reminds me where the place I was born.

26:33
It's where I used to grow up every day, open my eyes and like, oh, I thought it was a nightmare, but I'm back here. So, it was tough in the beginning, but I must confess, it was the biggest university of my life, And I met a couple of immigrants that gave me a hand to integrate.

26:54
And I found my space in this house that was a room with 35 Brazilians sleeping side each other. And turns out you don't need an alarm because everyone wakes up 4 a.m. in the morning to do the same job, like cleaning. Are you still in contact with people from that time? Not really. Not really. Not really. Really, really broke my story in a different way and always wishing them my blessings every time I think about it.

27:24
I consider them my mentors in life, really. So, then I really picture this. So, there is this box the size of your leg. Just to describe, guys, I'm not really tall, so would be a very small box. So, I felt like every day I was locking myself into that place and just feeling vulnerable and insecure. And I don't want to challenge the world.

27:51
But then starting to work in all the kind of jobs you can name, brother, can you even like picture like from cleaning to, you know, cooking. So, it's Brazil all over again. And how'd you get like to the advertising agency? Because there's an interesting story there. Okay. Definitely. He started like this. I went to a pub, and I saw those blackboards with prices and headlines come and dine with us, whatever.

28:21
I can do that. My handwriting is much more pretty than this, but I can't speak English. So, I used to look at the blackboard outside, write down with my handwriting, with illustration, making a better version of that layout, going inside the pubs, and showing the owner of the pub, mimicking and showing it. And like, wow, okay. How much do you want? was like, how much do you want to pay? Do you want to eat here? And then I give you couple

28:51
of  you know  10  pounds like  that's good enough  so I did  and also I started to clean that toilets and clean the pubs and doing like a bunch of other things and there are so many pubs in the UK so I was in paradise maybe  and technically I was still doing design because typography is one of my strengths since that day  and then I  not by luck but by synchronicity across the street that was a place called Bartle Bogle Hegarty (BBH)

29:20
It turns out was the agency I wanted to work on. So, my lunch times I used to hang outside and just wait for the creative directors. I was looking up to it, and I couldn't see any of them. So, I printed their LinkedIn profiles and then decided to wait for them and see if they matched the picture. So, it did not work well. And then turns out I really met this.

29:50
incredible man that really pointed me in the right direction and just to give a brief introduction of what happened to this story without losing the threat, so this guy Decided to have a tea with me and look into my portfolio, and you know headhunt me. I was like brother Wait, you just emailed me to see me and then I see in front of you. So, you don't have legal rights to work here. You are legal for a year buddy. So

30:20
So, you are asking me to get your job in the best agency in the world, and you have no education, no qualification.

30:31
Why would they give you that job, you speak English well. was like, brother, I just want a meeting. I just want to have an interview. I just want five minutes with these guys. That's all I take from that. So, we're basically saying that you're going to go and then guarantee that you can get yourself a job. That's right. So, I went and I met this profound mentor I had in my life called Eric Chia. This guy was head of a department in housing to the BBH.

31:00
And I arrived and this man just like, I have five minutes for you brother, just go on. And then I just started to show him a portfolio, and this guy was kind of not falling asleep, but he was beyond in the lack of interest. And then he's like, okay man, why would I give you this job? I was like, well, first of all, I’m not leaving the place without the job. And second, I just really want to not pursue anything man. really wanna.

31:29
Making the industry of design because I have a lot to offer by learning and then he's like obviously my speech was so limited and then he's like well, certainly you speak English Okay, what else you need? I said, actually need a letter of recommendation so I can get a visa uh Wow, you come here So come on my you can't give a job. It's like alright cool. Listen, um, I just left jail and I'm really struggling I believe that why were you arrested? Oh

31:59
So, this is a chapter that gets quite spicy. One of my master's in graphic design was by mimicking ways of surviving by creating my documents. Aka forgery. Indeed, just to make that quite formal. the first thing when I arrived in a strange country in the world of Latinos trying to make is they ask you, you know, do you have papers? Well, brother, I don't have.

32:29
of that privilege as far as I'm concerned. Well, Brazil was not so trendy back then, but was very famous to be, you know, having a huge history in illegal operations in paperwork. So, I was like, all right, cool, I'm going to ask my Brazilianos if they can connect me to someone to get paper. So, we need to get paper with this guy. And then I met this guy and then he showed me this piece of paper. I was like, dude, I'm paying you the money I'm

32:59
struggling to survive for a piece of toilet paper with my face on it and you calling me Portuguese. Listen to I hope that's not on the fence. You'll never be. You'll never be. That was the best option I had. And then I just started to laugh within myself and crying and like, why am I doing this? But oh good. So, the thing is, haven't had any, at that time I didn't have a computer. I barely had time to find a space for myself.

33:29
a friend of mine is like, so I told him, man, I can make paper better than this. This is ridiculous. And okay, cool, what can you do about it? I need your computer, I'm gonna install software that then in the night I can print something. I can make some designs for us and the next day we can find a printer and then we can make it. All right, cool. And then I signed to microwave all the papers I had to make them dehydrated and then put into the printer.

33:59
and make them juicy and realistic enough to a point that I was selling quite often and make my living out of that for a few months. So, the way it works is like you work over 20 hours a day doing those jobs illegally and you cannot work full time so you have to have many jobs of couple of hours a day so you cannot be hired. So, I was exhausted so the more money you make, the less hours you work and more time you sleep.

34:29
But I was actually doing the opposite so the times spare times I had I was really going to libraries really getting to know the UK and really studying and really Keeping my congruence into my dreams to make into world of design. That's like a very interesting thing So you did a lot of things that people would judge as criminal incorrect morally wrong like I don't know from forgery of

34:59
documents to doing all these different things and You are making a good living on that like you could make it decent leaving on that amazingly.

35:12
And actually, you came from a background where that was kind of okay, correct? Like where you grew up, you had a lot of criminal activity around you. So that was kind of okay doing it. You get to Europe, things are harsh. You can't make good money doing like jailbreaking phones, forgery, everything. How do you keep your drive to actually say, no, I want to be a designer. I want too basically almost.

35:42
like humiliate myself doing whatever, begging people for a job, everything and go and work 20 hours for no pay or little pay where I could be making a better living. It's a tough choice. It's not like a very, I think a lot of people would go like, this is the easy way out. Well, brother, thanks.

36:05
thing within you that calls spirit. Even if you haven't got enough access to consciousness, but there will be a glimpse of remembrance. So, every time I remember, had spare time with myself. was rarely, you know, walking those cold breeze nights and days in a strange country. Nothing would stop my dreams. So, what makes a man successful?

36:35
It's not his bravery; it's his act of surrender. All of those challenge, that’s just temporary, know, because the mission of your spirit is eternal. So, I could remember some moments within myself, like I need to keep going and become this designer.

36:54
So that's what kept me alive. But he's a demon. You can get away with so many things, so much, even if you become a master in your own illusion. But the reality, Jack comes every now and then and sometimes they smash your door, dress as a policeman, calling you monkey, handcuffing you and putting you into cold baths for a while. But I was ignoring that reality for a while, so I thought I was the smartest man in the world.

37:24
in that moment. So, I started to make loads of copies and papers and requests from clients, you know. My clients share the same things as me. They just wanna make, you know, like, some money to send back to their families and they just had the dream to have a better life. They're not opportunists, they're just big dreamers. So, I really connect with that, not disguising my lack of discipline, but I forgot that I'm not so smart as I thought.

37:54
So, one day I was working in this Japanese restaurant. I was a chef there. And then I went down back in the fridge. I used to spend hours there in my lunch break eating all the sweets and just feeding myself. had enough. I haven't had enough food or time to go and feed myself. So, saving some cash. And then this Japanese man, his head used to be as high as my chest. He just grabbed me by my neck and then just.

38:24
kicked me out of this place and I thought I was fired. I mean I had lots of reasons to be fired but in that moment I'm just eating a cheesecake brother and then  I was  so exposed to the cold it was snowing it was my first year in snow  and then I walk outside totally confused  and I go around in the front you're not allowed to come to the front of the restaurant since he was a Michelin star  and then I see that the place was shut down and then there was a blue van outside in the UK

38:54
the Famous are UK border truck. They control the immigration system in the country. And then I started to run. Oh, fuck me, I don't have any wallet and I haven't got anything. So, I jumped in a bus. I forgot the number of the bus, but it was a number I shouldn't catch any kind because that could take me to any destination away from there. So, I made home after four hours and so in a cold snow day. And then I just, when I arrived there,

39:24
There were police everywhere and then obviously I couldn't make it. That time I had a lover that I went to see her so until the dust could come down. And then I went back to my house, and all my stuff was packed, and things just disappeared and people thought the immigration took me back home. And then my landlord was like, you need to get the fuck outta here right now. So, you know, I got a bunch of stuff.

39:54
stolen bags and things  but I  took my paperwork with me or my factory of  illusion  under my arms and  I went back to my house,  sorry my lover's house that time and then I got myself a new place, a new job in another place and  turns out the police has been chasing me for a while and then I created myself a system where can hide my original documents and  what my system can be hidden  so I have

40:24
no trace behind. And then one day as I thought everything was fine and happy end, and then I come back home and I fell asleep in my bed, sitting, holding my suitcase, my backpack. And then I just got woke up with this massive slap on my face. Just like reality does sometimes. And then I just go, let's get a hair out of him, monkey.

40:54
exactly how my nightmare was, my reality became. So, and then that moment you think you're tough, I don't think you're tough enough. All you have to do is just surrender and just go into the truck of shame. And then they drove me to this place and obviously responsibility check. And then, so I had not much of a language to really express myself, but that place was beyond the physical. So, I had to find my community.

41:23
So, the lack of Latinos has been quite tremendous in that place. So, I stick around with the community of the West Indies. So, then I had the English class by learning how to get to speak again. So, then I connect with my support I have with a lover and connection I had and got a lawyer, and I made my way out. And then I got married and then the love story that ended up in nine months, but that was...

41:53
long enough for me to birth my opportunity to the industrial design so I got my job after that meeting I had with Eric Gia. Did he give you the recommendation letter? He did. Okay. And then so you go in... uh.

42:09
They give you an opportunity, right? You're there for a while and then they are supposed to decide on hiring you or not hire you and Then at a certain point like they didn't tell you on the last day. What did you do that? Well, here's the thing I had one brief one opportunity and one invitation to get out of here if you don't make it good enough, So I work for five days non-stop Literally to a point I felt like my bones were.

42:39
glowing. But for me, I always see that as an offering, know. And delivered the brief, then finally it was my last day, and I was sitting there waiting for my boss to come back and give me a recognition or at least say goodbye. And then these guys arrived really drunk from a festival and super fun. Obviously, they won loads of things. And then I just, all I want is just to win an opportunity and then this guy.

43:09
It's just like, all right, come back Monday and then we'll you feedback. And then one of the main creative directors decided to, you know, call me and like, turns out the story is this way. They all received the work. The client loved it. And it was a big bitch. And they were criticizing the ideas, and the sign was good and bad. And then my work made into the shortlist. And then this guy is a guy from East London. He speaks more or less like this. Who the fuck made this?

43:39
And I was like, is that a new kid? I don't know his name. the fuck it is, bring him back here. I want to talk to him. And then I went down there it was like a short man. I believe not shorter than me. And this guy has a bigger ego than Michael Jordan. And then he is room full of ice tree art and smells like arrogance. And I entered and he's like, looks from my long and cut toes to my bad haircut up.

44:09
I'm being your link. All right, man, you hired  and then I got my job  and  I remember going to the toilet in tears  Swiping up my phone  Realizing I had no one to go and tell that news  But I was looking myself in the mirror and giving the recognition that we haven't made yet or you started  that day I decided to call my mom  after  eight years  and I told her no matter the circumstances that happened in between

44:39
in Atlantic that lives flowing in our distance. I just want to say that I got where I want to start and I wanted to know that. What was her reaction? She was thrilled obviously.

44:52
I remember I didn't have time to walk in the streets and celebrate. How old were you then? was um... I was 20. So, you are 20, you're hired at one of the top advertising agencies in the world without credentials, probably your language skills are not top, but you impress them like with your work and creativity. Yes, I did by the discipline. And then how quickly, how quickly did you start getting noticed and when.

45:22
oh, what to a point that was lacking a bit of a humanness in reality checking pop culture. So that moment I realized that lots of creatives in industry, haven't really catched the bus. They haven't really queued up for many sorts of needs and not calling them. They have a privilege to be there, but their journey were not so tough as mine. And I realized that I could add something so human in here.

46:22
of creators who had this conversation before which is like people don't connect it's like let me do something cool let me do but they are talking to their peers  and when you're doing advertising or any type  branding  you have to communicate to your audience but one of the things I see very often is like  people are disconnected from reality and  they don't do things that  the market wants  and there's a I think there is like architecture there's an equilibrium between

46:52
art and functionality, getting to your goal. You mentioned architecture, he's a thing though. He's designing in general, know. Design is simply means to make life better, you know, it's to solve problems. And beautifully if you can by the way. Oh yeah, it's simply by being selfless for humanity, you know, it's an instrument of creation. For instance, let’s give a name to this dude, Jose, I'm not gonna call him John, come on. Jose walks into the,

47:22
cave after sunset and then Renato and Maria were there in the dark, pitch-black corner of the cave and then just another day I'm gonna hide myself in a cave waiting for the sunrise next day. This group of cavemen decided to sit down and fall asleep and to the point one this guy had to just make the calling of I'm no longer sleeping in the dark. So, this man takes a couple of sticks and stones and start too really.

47:52
make a reaction and realize that the first piece of technology has been created called fire. So, and then that's the first design. It's very close technology to you. Indeed. So, and then you realize that from that day, we climb up the animal kingdom, survival mode. So, we became the top predators in the world. But here's the thing. So, if you really think that you're going to change the world, okay, that's amazing, so beautiful, but you need to

48:22
start from the place, just to be in service, you So my service is designing creativity. And then that's why I always found my way, you know, away from the commonplace in creativity in the industry. So, I found my mentors, they were profoundly, you know, nurturing my process. I always listened to them as much as I could ever imagine, honouring the silence, but also speaking loudly as I could.

48:52
to express my desires and transform me in the ways of communicating in the industry. So that led me to my first award. But that year was deported because my wife divorced me. But I got called back into the UK with a letter of a sir inviting me back in the game to be part of the creative team. going back to Brazil gave me a reality check to remind me where I come from, but also to remember where I must go.

49:22
So, I was very content to be back in the game and really since that day I devoted to being contributing to transform the way we communicate and advertise. And then you come back to London. Yes. And you come back to London. How old are you then? 21, 22? Yeah, still 20. Same year, 2021. 2021. You come back; you have now a proper invitation, proper papers and things start to move. You've worked for...

49:52
absolute acts, Audi, Adidas, Samsung, Burger King, like some really top brands with massive budgets uh and I imagine at this point you're becoming a hot commodity, you know? I would say Khan and you're starting to do like all these things, you start to make more money, and you start to have access to a lot of things you never had before. That's right. oh, I was Vinny, like I was Vinny the man back then, like what did you go into because you.

50:22
have a lot of opportunities that you never had before, how do you deal with them? Because I know that there's a big transformation that you're going to stop to talk ahead. Who does Bini become? Day one, arriving in the UK, posing of joy of being alive into a spring of death.

50:46
rarely sunshine in So I walked into the office of this man called Mark Reddy with the mission of being his surface. And I sit down and show him a layout I was working for Axe. So, there was a big shift into this strategy from the ladies’ man get all the girls Axe effect to grooming strategy, something more like finding magic.

51:10
So, it actually, was very good because I was going through that myself. Two-year-old ladies, man. That's a very big chapter in this story. That's why I'm putting it there. So, the man just really destroyed my work in a way that you cannot imagine. Like, was like, whoa, terrified, like a terminator.

51:34
Okay, cool. Second day, boom, show him my dick. It's horrible. is not good. Third day, think I was like looking into my pocket, I like, I have no fucks left. And I must confess, I have no tolerance for this arrogance. I was thinking, but you know what? I this job, man. I need to learn and tell him about this guy's history change. Change. And then I showed him another layout and then he was just about to drop, man. It's massive argument.

52:04
And I just looked at him and listen, brother, I'm not going to take in this time. I just want you to give me your feedback because it turns out that's what you're meant to be doing your job, And then he's like, OK. Suddenly the man speaks. I must confess, you think you are arrogant. I'm going to show where I come from.

52:24
And he's like, do you know who the fuck you talking to? He told me. say, I'm 100 % man. I checked; I've done my homework. He's like, okay, close the door, man. Just turn yourself back in and gonna tell you something. The reasons why your work is not good is because of this, this, and this, and gave me the les pčs mandamentos of why my work was bad. And I was like, okay, cool, enough. So, what direction should I go? You need to study that public; you need to eat alive this bull.

52:54
this book, this, and this and this. I thought my job was tough enough. So, I spent the whole year literally working from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. without moving my ass out of the chair, not even going to get food. Just sitting and studying and working that book. Seven from seven to seven.

53:23
seven days a week, seven months. So, I lost probably 70 kilos. But I gained a lot of wisdom, you know, and so I dedicate myself to a point where I moved my desk from a little corner to close to his, and he mentored me like his own son. And turns out was one of the few years of his life in the industry because he was just about to retire. But he devoted himself to being.

53:53
service equally as I was for himself. So, then I'm not saying I mastered, but I really ate alive all the books and the content on the internet about typography and photography and, you know, kind of doing a Q &A with him. What's the fresh photographers at the moment and this and that. Understanding the classic-ness of British advertising, global communication, and it is to carry with me that, you know, child that really want to

54:23
make it so I what makes good at the time clarity in truth and communicating well actually it's beneficial for you to consume and that was something I learned with them but those guys mastered arty to advertising so turns out I had to learn that too so then in consequence of that came the gratification of financing awards

54:53
you deal with party, you mentioned that the Rolling Stones, you're a big fan. It's a lot of sex, drugs and rock and roll. How is this new version? You're having access to this new world that before you didn't. And usually there is some kind of delights and...

55:10
amazement for it that can take you like in different roads. I must confess I always really loved women in a way that was quite often unleashing my ego to be full time into that desire mode. But when you are starting to make the money, you never had in a country that perhaps we're considering to be almost impossible to make in the industry I was. And turns out for me it was effortless to be what they call good. Because I was...

55:39
always investing so much time to become great and recognized in what I was doing. So, then I signed to win awards and make my money and obviously having access to parties and drugs, immense number of drugs, sex, rock, and roll. And well, these I was full on into drug consumption and ladies, but that was not...

56:11
I was more curious to be...

56:19
one of the key members of Illusion in my art. So, and then I obviously, language speaking, always being one of my tools of making this life. So, I mastered the language and obviously understanding what was beneficial for my immersion pleasure. So, I really focused deeper, deep into the work and then climbed my way up to the role of senior art director creative.

56:49
Grasping to everything walkers we had in front of work hard party hard living the life everything that with it and you're full on and then you get a call to Go to Apple Yes, how does that call come? Yeah, well in it was a moment my career in Europe that was UK was going through the Brexit, and I was fighting so hard in in general.

57:19
uh know, jet-set my work and jet-set my arts and  constantly  high and constantly  devoted to be  exhausted by  the amount of drugs and sex and rock and roll was having and  mixing  all those freedom and all those discipline  and  taking a big  role in my job  that was really stressful for me and I...

57:47
really connected deeper with my ego to be extremely arrogant towards those that were not having the lack of understanding what was, you know, its own benefit. So, then I was to a point I felt like there was no growth for me here. Perhaps it was one of the clicks of the darkest moment in my life.

58:12
A party that was taking four days to end. And I kept going and a lot of drugs and sex encounters and more drugs and more drugs and then I finally made my way back home. don't know how. Four days later? Yeah, just like crazy. And then I had a shower and just fucked and destroyed and...

58:39
decided to charge my phone and when I go down to connect it then I just could have lapsed into a daydream sort of feeling. It's so much pain to my chest. And then I saw my mouth bubbling like soap. That was the first time I had an overdose in my life. And then I was like, wow.

59:08
I have no time to think what's going on but looks like I'm not gonna make it. Then I woke up in the hospital and got like another slap of a reality from a doctor, you know, that I expected to give me good news. He just tells me like...

59:26
Listen, you are literally wasting my fucking time. Right? Could be saving people's lives, but you're here just because you've been having an immense night on your own, having a selfish great time. So, you just had an initial heart attack and an overdose. So, you can call yourself for your own pleasure a miracle.

59:50
So, I don't know what you do in your life or you do for a living but just watch out because you're too young and I would consider changing my behaviour. And I was like, wow, whatever man, I'm ready for the next body. And then I made my way out and took some time off from work.

01:00:09
Got a phone call that changed my life. So, I had an invitation to work for Apple, to work with the iPhone team. And I knew that would be a green card, not just for America, but also to clean myself out of trouble. And so, I moved to California, San Francisco, and I bought myself a place. And I was extremely alone the whole time. Like, I'd be talking to myself from drive.

01:00:39
and distractions but I realized I was deep into the illusion of the sea from value. What are you afraid of? Today or then? Then and now. Now, anything before the loud voices in my mind. you're not afraid of anything now? I trust love fully, unconditionally, to be in service.

01:01:08
What would I be afraid of if I have my God and my spirit guides leads me to my mission that is very clear to me.

01:01:19
Okay, and at the time you were afraid of the voices in your head. Well, I was afraid of not making it. That's the first thing you do when you leave a place where I left. I just want to make it. What was making it? Exactly, that's a very good question. was expecting this journey, but... What was making it then and what is making it now? Alright, then it's just to have the financial...

01:01:49
security, know, be always in a know-how, you know, recognized professionally and, you know, always having digits in your banking account and... also, you know, the difference between then and now is that, you know, how much cost my freedom is priceless. know, freedom from the belief systems of...

01:02:19
having to prove something that you're not actually aligned to. My fear is to be out of that alignment, to prove others how great I was. But don't get me wrong, I've always been kind of a maverick in my industry, not giving a fuck about anything, to be fitting to the standards of acceptance. I always do my best, effortless, to be thinking different.

01:02:48
not to prove anything to others but just to make it be different to be recognized by the same? That's what I call illusion. Was it a way to like, you know what, I'm going to prove myself to you not the way you want me to prove myself but I'm going to prove myself in a way that you'll be surprised and that will actually take you out of your centre? Well, I would call that people natural worship.

01:03:18
It's like a rat, lamb, wheel, like music all around, rat wheel. I just keep going in circles for your own benefit to get me. And wait, there’s no expansion within that. I really got into the point that was like, is the dream job. This is the dream department. This is...

01:03:43
actually what I want for myself to be  in a position to work with the best design studio in the planet with the best creatives  and just be like  part of the chain and turns out I really like the product so I use that in a daily basis to call iPhone  and tell me something you get to San Francisco

01:04:07
So, you're basically trying to get out of drugs. You are a witch here. We're about Tendon Wolverine. What are we talking about?

01:04:16
two years before the pandemic. Okay, so like 2018. you got to San Francisco in 2018. That's like six years ago, so like 28. And then when you're there, you start working hard at Apple. First, tell us about a little bit like, especially being a creative at Apple, what's it like to work at Apple? Frustrating. Obviously, I'm not going to take that into

01:04:46
you

01:04:47
I'm not to say it in my own selfish perspective, but it’s a profound place to learn. Don't get me wrong, but it’s so much of a process and less of a freedom. you get me? So, you learn how to be more of a director than a creative. So, in Europe, it's totally the opposite. So, by being creative, you have enough support to become a director. So, because you work into a...

01:05:17
realm of freedom and creativity and empowerment of thinking free. In Apple is all about a process, it's all about how you can title, just like meditation, you're titling your thoughts as they come and fly. So, ideas in Apple are...

01:05:36
basically, the product of your survival. So, you have to always constantly give a title, a process in order to be billable for the system of the company. So, and the more thoughts and more ideas you have and the better you categorize them and shape them into a way everyone can understand. Well, that’s fantastic. But what I missed so much in my job was to be there in the room, setting with a passion,

01:06:06
on a table, not even wearing a shirt as you're rocking in leather jackets. So just really going for it and just evolving and involving people and connecting and humanist, bringing ideas to life. In that way it was a little bit different.

01:06:24
It was more like structures, ideas, clarity, process. So, people can engage with those ideas in your absence. So, they can survive through many layers of the process until they perhaps can make. But I'm...

01:06:40
I also did not like the transportation, the commuting system from San Francisco to the Silicon Valley. Trust me, brother, I don't want to be in the Silicon Valley, so it's been bothering. So, there's a taco place in the corner and a strip club in front of Apple. So that was our actual extracurricular entertainment, but you couldn't do it. But the campus wasn't amazing and had everything. It was just boring. It's like, I'm going to the strip club.

01:07:10
and have some tacos. Skip like the orange garden and skip like everything. There we go. Bro, I was a raver man. I was like a ladies’ man. I was like totally in the rhythm of the youth. know, like in the birth of Did you manage to stay out of trouble, or you got back into like the partying and the drugs and everything in San Francisco? Well, turns out Mexico City is not so far from San Francisco. They became my main...

01:07:40
commute at that time.

01:07:43
So, I literally decided to come and quite often see my brothers and sisters in Nectar City where I was spending a lot of time, and I moved away for a big couple of projects. I know it's exciting, but it still felt disconnected from the great, from the true core of the youth in our generation. This is something that London and Berlin has always been the living for us back then.

01:08:13
So, then I started to live out of saudade, know, the same word that really expressed, Portuguese word that expressed this.

01:08:22
unconditional missing of something that you love and honour so much, but you must let go in order to move on. So, and then I was living into that Fibonacci of desires of being somewhere, but I cleaned myself into my temporary rehab, wealthy rehab of my own house. Until the point I started to close my eyes and really connect with meditation, and I could hear one sound.

01:08:49
after the loud voices that come out. It was my heart. That had an attack before. No, I was clean. I was in totally surrender mode. But in there, I started to connect with the idea of inspiration.

01:09:11
So, what is actually inspiration is like by being spirit, correct? Once you are in spirit, you are in a position to be inspired and inspire others. So that’s why the shift is done.

01:09:29
So and then the more connection I had with the energy of this period  less interest I was  giving to my job  So and then I started to find a lack of belonging to the corporate world  So  well my colleagues were telling me man, why are you hating this job so much? This is the dream bro. You're making shit loads of money turns out in two years you retire You have the best brief the best product best team What’s what are you most what were you most proud of?

01:09:59
What are you most proud of that you did at Apple? None of the work.

01:10:05
mainly my discipline and dedication of something that I realized that does not serve me. So actually, I'm proud of Apple is to become one of my biggest mentors to show me that my freedom is priceless and I should definitely honour that. So, in order to be extremely successful, I do not need money. I do not need a system of corporation to tell me and to really.

01:10:35
support me and put a label on me and really make me be in service for them. Wow, there was an awakening, professional awakening, say, to leave that job behind. And then pandemic happens, you're still at Apple.

01:10:53
Yes, indeed. you're still at Apple. Do you have stock or you don't have stock? No, that's the whole point. No, but you had stock. I did. You had stock options or stock? Everything came made for my own benefit. Okay. Financially and created. Financially, you have all the conditions, and this is like, arriving from the ghetto in Brazil, you're at Apple, you're probably becoming a millionaire soon. ah

01:11:23
All these things are happening,  people around you,  probably people you grew up with can't even imagine the life you're going through, the places you're at,  your peers that you were probably at the beginning of your career in London also want to be you or want to be where you are.  And then suddenly pandemic hits, you're already going a little bit through this transformation and what happens then?

01:11:51
I received the same phone call in London but into bloom. What are you doing there? oh?

01:12:03
How you start this story like this? I'm going to start from the beginning of the pandemic. So, one of my best friends, Dana, me and went, listen, brother, the world is going to be upside down. So where are you finding yourself to be in that moment? I like, first of all, the world is round. So

01:12:24
There are no corners to hide, so I think I'm in the right place. What's up? Well, I'm in Tulum. So, and I have a profound opportunity for you to be here with me, join us in this holistic festival that's going to happen this weekend. Why don't you pick up your bags and come here and see what's up with the world? I'm like, wow.

01:12:45
sounded like a juicy opportunity to be free. I was like, you know what? I'm going to pack my bags and go spend a weekend in Tulum. So, I did. Brought my computer, my actual office. Then I flew straight to the Tulum invitation and then spent a week there, turned, wow, okay, great. I need to go back and then...

01:13:13
I received a phone call. What's up brother, how are you? It was my boss. And the creative director just asked me, what's plan? So, you know that United States is closing the border and Apple, I think Apple is gonna shut down. So, they're talking about this thing called lockdown.

01:13:35
and you're have to be home. So, I just wanna check if your house has enough infrastructure to be in service for the company. I was like, what? Dude, I’m in Mexico. Perfect, stay there. Do you have enough infrastructure to be there? I was like, yes, I find my way, But I'm not, I'm in United States. And then, like, great. because they're shutting down all the...

01:14:01
everything man the city is like in panic so stay there cool thank you so i'm gonna send you a brief of the new iphone in a second so make sure you're ready for that there'll be a series of calls and just another day out of the paradise so and I

01:14:22
you know, finished this holistic program and I was into it. My best friend left to a city called Tepoztlán and I stayed still in Tulum. And he called me again. The world is actually going to be even worse. So just so you know, I want to know if you actually have enough infrastructure before they actually shut down the borders of the United States officially.

01:14:50
I'm not going back, so I'm staying here. Okay,

01:14:54
You have enough faith instruction? Yes. And then that was it. Out of nowhere, the gods gave me the gift of my computer to burn. So, I lost all my files, I lost all my access to the corporate and the divine forces of the prison of my intellect. And realizing that my spirit was free yet. And then they tried to help me as much as they could.

01:15:24
computer, he, and that, they really dragged him, threatened me to fly me in private to go bac. Whatever was happening, I was not interested because what could go wrong? So, I'm in the best place in my life right now. I was escaping. So, what happened was I had a week to decide what to do. I didn't wait long enough.

01:15:52
So, I wrote a letter of resignation that transformed my life. Perhaps that too, which I actually gave to them about my process. But I just... Call post that if you don't mind. It's a juicy one. So, I expressed that with clarity. I really tapped finally into my mission here. Right?

01:16:17
And that clarity made beyond clear that I cannot be in service for the corporate world anymore. he called me in like; you are kidding me? cannot follow this lecture. You cannot do that; you have a dream job. have millions already coming in your life. You're genius. You have everything in your life. It's all there, man.

01:16:46
Okay, you're gonna lose your stock. You're gonna lose your shell, you're gonna lose everything. Great. Listen, how much money you gonna lose? Well, you're talking about a lot of How much cost my freedom, I ask myself. Priceless. So, I am totally aiming to pay. So, I quit and...

01:17:14
I don't know if I was going to be fired anyway, but I had no fucks left for that occasion. But I was very grateful for the journey. So, from now on, that time I say to myself, from now on I'm going to be devoted and understand what the magic represents to me. So going back to the inspiration, know, I'm inspired. And how goes the process then? What happened at the time? You are in Tulum?

01:17:43
You quit your job and there's still like quite some work to do personally now. Wow. The thing is... Because I didn't know you at the time. Actually, I wasn't in the room at the same time, but we did a little chat and have a lot of friends in common. And I just this morning I was with a friend in common and he was like, no, Vinny wasn't completely free man.

01:18:08
What happens then? And that's part, in Tulum you're not like that new version completely at the beginning.

01:18:15
What changed and how did you go on that process? Here's the thing, nothing changed, right? It's because you really understand what reality is. So, your mind, your desires, your illusion really makes everything for your Favor. It's your own emergent pleasure, your own benefits. I decided to just stop everything and just listen to my thoughts.

01:18:46
Realizing that was carrying so much suffering so much pain Wow, it's just so much it’s basically you arrive at a place and they have like oh.

01:18:59
millions of printed two-piece in a room and I just sit down. The only thing have right now is time because the world literally stopped. Brother, I'm not gonna be locked down. I'm gonna lock myself out. So, I sat down and it's time to go through all the archives into my mind, my memories, and sufferings and all of that, categorizing my time in mind. And then I wrote an essay that's called The Mind Designer in that time. That was my diary.

01:19:29
and my spiritual journey that was writing chapters of how to organize my spiritual discipline.

01:19:40
So, then I saw that like Tulum has this for me one of the most mystic places in that time. only people that have spent there quite some time understand it. Besides all the party place and everything, models, bottles, everything like there’s a magic to the place that is very unique. Well, here's the thing man, Tulum carries something that I was carrying too. So, Tulum has the majestic, feminine, divine force that leaves.

01:20:10
in the water experience that you really navigate under your feet. So, I was carrying so much feminine pain within me, connection with my body and all of that. Ladies and all things that I used to really be into and be judgmental about it. So, I started to really go to some rituals and some events and then see a fire there, like burning.

01:20:39
And I'm always then finding myself into that safe container. Not just for the sake of being warm, but just really trying to understand what's the role of that thing, that divine spirit in our lives. But I was like, I have time. I don't need to be anywhere. I don't need to be called by anyone. So, I literally don't even have a mobile phone anymore, and whatever.

01:21:06
One thing I had was like time and money that time. And then I got invited to be in a place in the city of Tulu. And there was like... La Valletta, right? Yeah, La Valletta. There was a hole in the middle of the back garden. And I was like, what was that? That was a fire there. was like, yes. Okay, so Vinny, are you moving in? Yeah, we have a room. Okay, cool. I must say, now I'm moving in.

01:21:35
From the moment I'm here to the moment I leave; I'm going to keep the fire on. And all right, cool. Amazing. So, what does that actually meant to me? I did not know and I had no expectation. But every day I was there devoted to keep the fire going. What did that do for you? It did not burn anything, but it just made everything that was hidden to the shadows clear with the light.

01:22:04
So, I realized I have way more work to do than I thought. So, what I did was really trying to understand how to come to voice the loud voice in my mind. And really trying to channel a clear connection with my spirit. And how to be more in silence and really be in service for others. And...

01:22:31
As I had no source of information in computers and phones, I was just literally connecting the most profound ways of learning in this human experience through nature and humans. So, I was going to immense hours of conversations with friends and people that really contributed so much to my journey and transformation.

01:23:01
and started to meditate into this fire. know, my knees for hours just really like listening and feeling the heat, connecting the energy of the sun. To a point,  I opened my eyes in my house in this fireplace that I with my own hands and I started to see some guests coming and joining me and I started to make new friends and say, listen, every day, sunset in my house, will be a fire. You're very invited, so come.

01:23:28
Do I bring anything? if bring whatever you want, say, whatever is your alchemy, as long as you're in spirit, you're welcome. And they come and one day I opened my eyes, it was like over 50 people joining us. It became an actual century to be in service for others because everyone was supporting and creating this energy together. And I realized that, whoa, self-work's actually fun.

01:23:55
And so, I did go... like an extreme sport. And you look for adventure inside instead of outside. Well, brother, when I go into do something in my life, I go into the deepest intentions. You can have a go and make that happen. The best way is possible in my reality.

01:24:15
So, and then I went in deep studies and readings and connecting with the right people and finally I invited all the medicines into their equation, the guidance of all the spirits. And then Tulum goes, there was that magic period of Tulum, then you leave Tulum.

01:24:38
You meet your amazing girlfriend, Zohar. Yeah. And then you have like all this journey. Well, here's the thing, man. The United States finally opened. They opened the gates of division. And I finally...

01:25:00
I had the opportunity to go back to my apartment in San Francisco and pack my bags and come back. Oh, the way, I'm not going to do that easy, you know? I met this profound medicine woman, Maestra, old spirit, and now it’s beyond an inspiration. It's my reality of...  She makes me feel that the world frees in all the possibilities.

01:25:28
to be falling in my lap because I'm in spirit with her constantly, especially myself first. So, then I, at that time, you just, you know, love us. And I asked her, listen, do want to come to San Francisco with me and pack my bags and drive back to Tulum? And I'm like, what? I thought she would say no. like, 100%. I know you for less than a week, but I'm coming with you. So, you went.

01:25:57
packed all my bags, everything, gave me so much away and then just whatever can fit in the back I bring. So, turns out it was just a couple of suitcases. But that was enough treasure for me to live an abundant life of freedom. They feel priceless. paid my taxes. You know, reality check, oh great.

01:26:26
left United States, come back to my sacred Mexico, the land of fire, and...

01:26:34
had the most authentic clarity from the universe that this is the place for me to live and co-create. So, I spent nine months living in the wild, connecting from the United States until Oaxaca and driving through the mountains and deserts and oceans and wherever you can name the flora and abundance of the land and connect with medicines and spirits and realized that.

01:27:04
This is what I call freedom. And now tell me something because now you have a beautiful home, a beautiful girlfriend, so you're getting more, let’s call it in a traditional way, more settled. How does that do with the freedom you had before just to do whatever you wanted?

01:27:27
Okay, so do you think you're you settle well, he's a thing not settled like yeah go on you it’s a more traditional it kind of let’s put it like this. Some people might find it less exciting and you're putting it as more exciting and now so like how you got through all this craziness you get like to Peace that is more exciting than all the craziness before That’s what I wanted to

01:27:57
I've been here before and what a settle means for me was before having a house and a spouse and a child and a dog and living in a postcode in a corner buying you have your cotton book or what I never thought I would be actually one woman for a week. know, like clean out of drugs and desires away.

01:28:25
That's what I call being unsettled because you are free from those things that set you down into those belief systems. Okay. So that's where you can call yourself. You are unsettled, but you are actually devoted to have freedom with discipline. then by living like that, first of all, in love with yourself, by having a company and companionship. Wow. That's what I call life, man. So, we.

01:28:55
I ended up my life with $100 again in my pocket after the old dream pandemic. And I lost all the money I had. I was like, well, what am I going to do here?

01:29:11
Well, I have everything I wanted to start again. I did, brother, I did. And it's starting to really puzzle together. All my journey back then and now, I started to find there's a huge lack of finding a title for what I do for living. So, I call myself a design alchemist. that means, basically, you can literally combine any kind of disciplines.

01:29:41
design into a museum network combined into one problem solving.

01:29:52
thread of thought that brings into a huge idea of solving the problem and being serviced in the most profound way. So, in fact, from that day I had the idea, I decided to also only work with clients and partners that want to have uh clarity in their mission here for humanity by being, you know, more sustainable, more conscious about not encouraging unconscious consumption,

01:30:22
just being creative and designed to last longer and really just empowering what I call being service, you know? And so that’s how I made my current abundance by just doing what I love the most, really.

01:30:41
So, you went to lose yourself outside to find yourself inside and then you were able to Yeah build again. That's right. What would you tell your 20-year-old self if you Enjoy and go as deep as you want but never rely on faith?

01:31:04
And every opportunity you have to just be in silence and listen to your heartbeat, that’s going to be the orchestral of your success. And just really remember that the breath is the currency of your presence. again, you don't pay taxes to think and dream, brother. Just go for it. will find out. Do you have any regrets?

01:31:34
That you would do things differently. Yeah, I had many regrets. That was probably one of the most, the biggest pain that was carrying my life.

01:31:46
And then when you stop feeling that connection with regret, you're starting to forgive others. But you're like, wait, I don't need to forgive anything. Who am I, God? You just gotta be grateful for everything that happens in your life. And then just clap for that mastery. And then don't forget to really stop tapping on your shoulders and saying that you make it, you're making. Just really, just remind your values.

01:32:16
and really find a role in the community, in the collective ascension. Because if you think you're going to accomplish all your dreams in one lifetime, you're not thinking big enough. But if you really think big...

01:32:32
It can be measured by the human scale. So, you're basically again going to the feed of natural illusion. You know, just really don’t give yourself your ideas scale. Just give them packed and others. That makes sense. Yeah. And I know you want to have kids. Kids that will be born in a very different place where you were born.

01:33:00
What would you teach them and how would you teach them? Wow, that's a very juicy question, I must confess. um Well, don’t get me wrong, I think quite often, you know, to be in the fatherhood position in my life, what I just want to, I just want them to understand that everything is possible, but in its own time.

01:33:30
understanding also the time.

01:33:33
Again, back to the cliché, it's an illusion, but it's your soul, soul, and energy, right? So, you gotta put the currency of your success. Your currency of success is your time, you when you're offering your time and just being a discipline and really devoted to really transform. But oh, wait, you cannot do anything alone. The more...

01:34:00
The more the right people you involve into your process in order to nature, definitely gets more exciting. So just take your time to really stop classifying your ideas and give them scale or just really understand how much impact they can cause on others by just simply being service and also empowering the power of creativity within them.

01:34:29
So, because imagine this, right? So, your mind can also make your life.

01:34:36
falling apart, right? Like, it's a strife and disaster and dramatic. But actually, your mind can also make things fall into places, you know. Create an order and a system out of any belief systems so you can be free from it and find your mindfulness. And there's no age for that, so I want them to understand that since you're young, the power of the service. Who will Vinny be in 10 years?

01:35:08
Hopefully, hopefully still looking very juicy and happy in the heart. That's for sure. Well, we always look into the future by imagining us a better version, right? Definitely we want that for ourselves. But also, I want to be in a place where I can be a better mentor for myself and for others as inspirations and...

01:35:37
Before I wish anything for myself, I just want the world to be in a better place, to be honest with you. I just want the world to be...  more integrity and awareness of...

01:35:51
consciousness and accessibility for communities and others that lack what us privileged ones have. I just want to have more unity in that 10 year so I can blow the candle and feel that this is a place to give a birth. Does that make sense?

01:36:13
Lini, it’s an honour being your friend and hopefully I can be at this celebration in 10 years again like we did this year in Sochi, Milico. I think we end in a great note. Thank you so much. It's always amazing talking to you and so engaging. I think it's one of the longest podcasts we've done. And I think we'll have like plenty more to talk soon with all the projects that being involved. Thank you so much. Pleasure.

01:36:43
the letter of honour to be in especially in the position these sweaty pants in hours of conversations to really just.

01:36:55
I'd be immensely grateful for really you have interest on my story, on my  sharing and  hopefully this can be  useful as  instrument of inspiration and hopefully those that resonate with the story can realize that it can be free from those belief systems that  make them the title  into a system that does no longer serve them  and empowering their ideas.

01:37:22
If you enjoy the show, please subscribe to our podcast on Spotify or wherever you listen to your podcasts. You may reach out to us for commenting, giving suggestions or just say hi by email x at LITS Adventures.com, Twitter and Instagram at LITS Adventures and LinkedIn LITS Adventures.

01:37:41
LITS is L-I-T-S and stands for Life is Too Short. LITSEX Podcast is a result of the teamwork between Pietri Shosa, Janos Gajer, Lydian Marie Friedrich, Sigurd Koltz and David Bernardo Santo. Please remember that more than providing answers, LITSEX Podcast aims to raise awareness and questions about topics that are becoming relevant and discussed in society. The podcast reflects the personal views of each of its participants.

01:38:11
and not any institutions. It's not in any way meant to give investment, health, medical, or any other type of advice. Many of the topics addressed are still not fully tested, confirmed, or approved, so please question everything you hear and exercise extreme caution.

01:39:44
Okay.

